esting, though oversimpliﬁed, illustration of the poten-
tial importance of this process. It suggests that the oxy-
gen content of the deep ocean has the potential to vary
between 0 and 316 mmol m
/C0 3 with changes in the sur-
face phosphate concentration of the high latitudes of
between 0.24 and 2.1 mmol m
/C0 3. This sensitivity was
exploited by Sarmiento et al. [1988a] to provide a hy-
pothesis for the cause of episodes of deep ocean anoxia
(total depletion of oxygen) that have been observed in
the geological record of the ocean sediments. If, for ex-
ample, the high-latitude phosphate were to drop, then
(1.2.8) suggests that the deep ocean oxygen should also
drop.
However, in subsequent work with more sophisti-
cated three-dimensional models of ocean circulation
consisting of tens of thousands of boxes, it was found
that the sensitivity of the deep ocean oxygen to high-
latitude nutrients was much smaller than predicted by
the three-box model [ Sarmiento and Orr , 1991]. The
three-dimensional models lose only 41 mmol m
/C0 3 of
oxygen when nutrients are reduced to zero, as con-
trasted with the loss of more than 180 mmol m
/C0 3 that
our box model gives. The three-dimensional models
conﬁne the reduction of deep ocean oxygen to regions
just below the high-latitude deep water formation re-
gions so that the average deep ocean oxygen drops only
modestly. This and the previous examples demonstrate
clearly the importance of understanding ocean trans-
port and of understanding how to develop box models
that can represent the circulation realistically.
1.3 Chapter Conclusion and Outline of Book
The central concern of this book is to understand the
processes that control the mean oceanic concentration
as well as the spatial and temporal variations of chem-
icals that are inﬂuenced by biological processes. As
illustrated by the box models, this requires under-
standing the transport of chemicals by processes such as
advection and diffusion. It also requires us to under-
stand sources and sinks of the chemicals, such as bio-
logical uptake and remineralization, as well as boundary
conditions at the surface and bottom of the ocean such
as gas exchange and sediment water ﬂuxes.
The view taken in what follows is that kinetic processes
are the primary control on the composition of the ocean,
as proposed by Broecker’s response to Sille ´n’s equilib-
rium view [ Broecker, 1971]. This view was explored in
detail in the book Tracers in the Sea that Broecker wrote
with Peng in 1982. The progress since then, and recent
completion of several global measurement and model-
ing programs, suggests the need for a new look at what
we have chosen to call ‘‘ocean biogeochemical dynam-
ics.’’ This title recognizes the important role of biological
and geological, as well as chemical, processes, in con-
trolling the oceanic composition of the chemicals we will
study here, as well as the fact that these phenomena
show considerable change through time.
We begin in chapter 2 with a derivation of the tracer
conservation equation and a review of our understand-
ing of ocean transport by advection and mixing. Subse-
quent chapters will go through each of the other pro-
cesses that must be speciﬁed in order to solve the tracer
conservation equation. Boundary conditions must be
given at the air-sea interface and at the ocean ﬂoor.
Among the boundary processes that must be considered
are gas exchange at the air-sea interface, and ﬂuxes from
the sediments resulting from reactions in the sedi-
ments. We must also consider sources and sinks inter-
nal to the ocean due to chemical and biological pro-
cesses. Chemical processes will not be dealt with as a
separate topic, but rather will be brought into the dis-
cussion whenever relevant, primarily as part of the ex-
amples. Biological processes can remove inorganic chem-
icals by photosynthesis, which uses light as a source of
energy, or chemosynthesis, which uses chemical reac-
tions as a source of energy. The major region where this
occurs is in the euphotic zone at the surface of the ocean,
where light is sufﬁcient to support photosynthesis. Bi-
ological processes also add inorganic chemicals by re-
mineralization of organic matter. This occurs at all
depths in the ocean as well as in the sediments.
We cover each of these topics beginning at the sur-
face and moving down through the water column into
the sediments. Chapter 3 deals with boundary condi-
tions at the air-sea interface. Chapter 4 covers the for-
mation of organic matter in the surface ocean. Chapter
5 covers the transport of organic matter from the sur-
face to the abyss and its remineralization at depth.
Chapter 6 covers the ocean sediments. The emphasis of
these chapters is on the chemical cycles of the major
nutrients (nitrate and phosphate) and oxygen.
After developing a deeper understanding of relevant
oceanic processes as well as the cycling of the major
nutrients and oxygen, we apply this understanding to an
analysis of the chemical cycles of silicon in chapter 7 and
carbon in chapter 8, and of CaCO
3 in chapter 9. Finally,
chapter 10 applies the tools developed in chapters 1
through 9 to a discussion of three of the major out-
standing problems in our understanding of the inﬂu-
ence of the ocean on atmospheric carbon dioxide. These
are the role of the ocean as a sink for anthropogenic
carbon, in the interannual variability of atmospheric
carbon dioxide, and in the large reductions of atmo-
spheric carbon dioxide that occurred during ice ages.
Introduction
15