Problems
1.1 Explain in words why we think that neither the accumulation hypothesis
nor the equilibrium control hypothesis is correct for explaining the
huge variations that we observe for the mean oceanic concentration of
the different elements in the ocean.
a. Describe the test that we devised for the accumulation hypothesis and
what information we used to reject this hypothesis.
b. Do the same for the equilibrium hypothesis.
1.2 If we nevertheless accept the hypothesis that the mean concentration of
elements in the ocean is a result of the accumulation from river input, how
large would today’s ocean concentration be of magnesium, arsenic,
chlorine, and gold? (Use an ocean age of 3.85 billion years and the river
concentrations given in table 1.1.1).
1.3 List two elements that fall into each of the following categories: biolimiting,
biointermediate, and biounlimited. Explain the basis of your choice.
1.4 During photosynthesis, how many free oxygen molecules are produced
per nitrogen atom consumed? How many free oxygen molecules are
produced per carbon atom consumed?
1.5 Equation (1.2.2) tells us that, at steady state, the upward supply of nutrients has
to be balanced by the downward ﬂux of nutrients in organic matter.
a. Discuss how the biological export production would change if the deep
and surface concentrations were suddenly halved.
b. Discuss how biological export production would react to a sudden dou-
bling of the vertical exchange rate n.
1.6 Describe what would happen in the one-box model if the concentration of
phosphate in the ocean was suddenly doubled, but the river input and removal
rate constant k remained the same. Describe ﬁrst the ﬁnal steady state, and
then the time it would take to achieve the ﬁnal steady state.
1.7 What would happen to the global mean oceanic phosphate concentration if the
river concentration of phosphate in the one-box model were suddenly to
double? Draw a graph of concentration versus time, showing the behavior
in time as well as the ﬁnal concentration. Assume that phosphate removal
is ﬁrst order.
16