a. Solve ﬁrst for steady state. Then draw the solution at t ¼ 0 and at t ¼ ?.
b. Solve for the time-dependence. Use the solution given in panel 1.1.1.
Add the time-dependence to the ﬁgure.
c. Discuss what determines the response time of the ocean.
1.8 Suppose that the input of a chemical to the ocean were to vary sinusoidally
with a frequency o of 2p/100,000 yr/C0 1 and an amplitude equal to 50% of the
mean input. What is the ratio of the amplitude in the oceanic concentration
variation to the mean oceanic concentration for Mg and Si? (Assume that
removal for both is ﬁrst order and that the mean life for each is as given by
table 1.1.1.)
1.9 Suppose that the removal rate for a substance A is second order in
the concentration of A and B, i.e., R
A ¼ V /C1 k1 /C1 [A] /C1 [B]. Such might be the
case if A were removed from the ocean by precipitation as the mineral AB.
Suppose further that B is removed both by precipitation with A, but also
by a separate ﬁrst-order removal process, such that R
B ¼ V /C1 k1 /C1 [A] /C1 [B] þ
V /C1 k2 /C1 [B].
a. Derive an equation for the steady-state concentrations of A and B in
terms of the river concentrations.
b. Show the approximate solution for the case where the river concen-
tration of B is much greater than the river concentration of A. Compare
this solution with the solution for ﬁrst-order removal.
1.10 The water sinking into the deep box of the two-box model comes primarily
from high latitudes. Suppose that the water sinking from the high latitudes
has a radiocarbon ratio R
s* of 0.92 but that everything else is as in the
two-box model discussed in panel 1.2.1.
a. What is the volume exchange rate between the deep and shallow boxes?
b. The shallow box has a thickness of 100 m and the deep box a
thickness of 4000 m. What is the residence time of the surface box
with respect to exchange with the deep box? What is the residence
time of the deep box with respect to exchange with the surface box?
c. How large is the biological export production in this case (in units of
carbon, e.g., Pg C yr
/C0 1)?
1.11 Consider an element C that is transported to the surface in the two-box
model, where g is the fraction of upwelled nutrients that is converted to
organic matter and then carried into the deep ocean.
a. Derive an equation for g in terms of the surface and deep ocean con-
centrations.
b. Calculate the magnitude of g for the following elements using the data
in table 1.1.1 for the deep ocean concentration, and the following
surface concentrations.
Cs (mmol m/C0 3)
P 0.1
Ba 0.026
Ca 10,251
Introduction
17