Chapter 2
Tracer Conservation and Ocean Transport
The tracer conservation equation establishes the rela-
tionship between the time rate of change of tracer con-
centration at a given point and the processes that can
change that concentration. These processes include wa-
ter transport by advection and mixing, and sources and
sinks due to biological and chemical transformations.
This book is dedicated primarily to a study of the sources
and sinks due to biological and chemical transforma-
tions. However, we begin our study in this chapter with a
derivation of the conservation equation, including the
transport terms, accompanied by an overview of ocean
circulation. The ocean circulation overview begins with a
discussion of advection driven by wind forcing. The next
two subsections focus on the wind-driven circulation in
the upper kilometer of the ocean in the presence of
stratiﬁcation, and also the deep ocean circulation below
that. A ﬁnal section discusses non-steady-state behavior
of the oceanic circulation, with a focus on mesoscale
eddies and interannual to decadal variability of the upper
ocean.
Our discussion of ocean circulation focuses on only a
few major features that are critical for understanding
ocean biogeochemistry. Textbooks such as that of Pond
and Pickard [1983] provide a more detailed discussion of
the basic theory of ocean circulation [cf. also Pedlosky,
1996], and Siedler et al. [2001] provide an up-to-date
overview of observations and modeling focused pri-
marily on results from the World Ocean Circulation
Experiment (WOCE) carried out in the 1990s [cf. also
Warren and Wunsch , 1981].
2.1 Tracer Conservation Equation
The tracer conservation equation for a volume of water
at a ﬁxed location has the form
@C
@t ¼ @C
@t
/C12
/C12
/C12
/C12
advection
þ @C
@t
/C12
/C12
/C12
/C12
diffusion
þ SMS(C )( 2 :1:1)
where the term SMS(C ) (mmol m/C0 3 s/C0 1) represents in-
ternal sources minus sinks. We use C to represent tracer
concentration in mmol m /C0 3, as in chapter 1. Geochem-
ists generally prefer to report concentration in units of
moles per unit mass of water (micromoles per kilogram,
i.e., mmol kg
/C0 1) rather than per unit volume. This is
because water is compressible and the volume is thus
a function of the pressure and temperature, whereas
the mass is not. As a consequence, mass is conserved
with changes in state, whereas volume is not. However,
the use of per unit mass in the conservation equation
is unwieldy because it requires including density and all
of its derivatives. Furthermore, most present models of
the ocean are based on approximations that imply con-
servation of volume. We will therefore generally use
units of mmol m
/C0 3 for concentration. These can be
converted to mmol kg/C0 1 by dividing by the density in
kg m/C0 3/C2 10/C0 3.
In what follows we ﬁrst derive the advection and
diffusion components, and then consider the applica-
tion of the conservation equation to box models such as
those described in chapter 1.
Advection and Diffusion Components
We derive the advection and diffusion components
of the tracer conservation equation by considering an
inﬁnitesimally small cube of water with ﬁxed vol-
ume, such as that shown in ﬁgure 2.1.1. The total
amount of tracer in the cube is equal to the concen-
tration C times the volume of the cube V (m
3). Panel
2.1.1 shows how we derive the advective contribution to
the amount of tracer contained in the volume. The ﬁnal
equation for the advective component of the conserva-
19