2.9 In 2092, nearly 100 hundred years after the ﬁrst extra-solar planets were
observed, two astronomers in Geneva ﬁnd a solar system that rotates in
the opposite direction from our solar system. They are particularly excited
by the ﬁnding of a planet that looks almost identical to Earth, with oceans and
continents, but which rotates in the opposite direction from our Earth.
a. In which directions would you expect the trade winds to blow on this
planet?
b. Would you expect upwelling or downwelling on this planet near its equator?
c. Assuming that the strength of the trade winds is similar on this planet
to that on Earth, how strong is the equatorial up- or downwelling on this
planet relative to that on Earth?
d. In which direction would you expect the subtropical gyres to spin?
e. Would we ﬁnd strong boundary currents (such as the Gulf Stream) in
the oceans on this planet? If yes, on which side of the oceans basin
would you expect them to be found?
2.10 Many decades before the astonishing ﬁnding of the astronomers from Geneva,
a team of U.S. astronomers identify a planet that rotates twice as fast as Earth,
yet in the same direction. In addition, they ﬁnd that this planet has a very
similar distribution of oceans and continents as Earth. Suppose that the
strength and direction of the winds on this planet are similar to those on Earth.
a. How does the strength of the coastal upwelling and downwelling on
this planet compare with that on Earth?
b. Would you expect a stronger or weaker subtropical gyre? Explain
your answer.
c. How strong do you expect the western boundary currents to be on
this planet relative to the Earth?
2.11 Draw a schematic latitude by depth section of salinity in the Atlantic Ocean
and identify the following major water masses:
/C15 North Atlantic Deep Water
/C15 Antarctic Intermediate Water
/C15 Antarctic Bottom Water
2.12 What happens to the density of a seawater parcel
a. if freshwater is added?
b. if a strong wind cools it?
c. if it is moved from the surface to 3000 m depth?
2.13 What is meant by the expression ‘‘stratiﬁcation’’? What determines stratiﬁ-
cation, and how does stratiﬁcation relate to the vertical exchange of material
(e.g., nutrients, etc.)?
2.14 Referring to the Atlantic and Paciﬁc Ocean PV and age contours shown in
ﬁgures 2.3.5, 2.3.11, and 2.3.12, illustrate and discuss the basic structure of
PV contours on a typical isopycnal surface in the thermocline of the sub-
tropical gyre, and discuss the ﬂow associated with these contours, including
the ventilated, recirculation, and shadow zones.
70
Chapter 2