Chapter 3
Air-Sea Interface
Having introduced the tracer conservation equation
and discussed ocean transport, we now consider the
processes at the air-sea and ocean bottom interfaces and
biogeochemical processes internal to the ocean that
need to be speciﬁed to solve for the tracer distributions.
This chapter discusses gas exchange at the air-sea in-
terface. This exchange has a major impact on the dis-
tribution of gases within both the ocean and the at-
mosphere. The ﬁrst section of this chapter introduces
the major gases in the atmosphere and ocean. We then
discuss the solubility of gases in seawater, and the
processes at the air-sea interface that control the air-sea
exchange. A ﬁnal section illustrates the application of
the gas exchange model to several important problems.
3.1 Introduction
The gaseous composition of our atmosphere is unique
in the solar system because of the impact of biological
processes on all the major constituents except the noble
gases: argon, neon, helium, krypton, and xenon (table
3.1.1). Our discussion in this chapter will focus pri-
marily on three of these gases, O
2,C O 2, and N 2O,
which are produced and consumed in large quantities
by biogeochemical processes within the ocean. Two of
them, CO
2 and N2O, are among the gases that play an
important role in controlling temperature at the surface
of the Earth through the greenhouse effect of trapping
long-wave radiation emitted from the surface of the
Earth (see chapter 10). Both gases have been increasing
at an unprecedented rate in the atmosphere due pri-
marily to human impacts (for example, deforestation
and fossil fuel burning in the case of CO
2) and are
believed to be major contributors to global warming
(see chapter 10). Concern about global warming, as well
as our interest in the contribution of greenhouse gases
to longer term climate variations, are among the major
motivations for continuing interest in understanding
what controls the air-sea ﬂux of these and other gases.
The net air-sea ﬂux of a gas A is directly proportion to
the partial pressure difference across the air-sea interface
or its corresponding concentration anomaly, deﬁned as
DpA ¼ pA
w
/C0 pA
a
and
D[A] ¼ [A]w /C0 [A]equilibrium
(3:1:1)
respectively. In these equations, [A] is concentration in
mmol m
/C0 3, pA is the partial pressure in atmospheres,
and the subscripts w and a refer to water and air, re-
spectively. Partial pressure is deﬁned such that the sum
of the partial pressures of all gases is equal to the total
atmospheric pressure. According to Henry’s law, the
partial pressure of a gas above a liquid with which it is
in thermodynamic equilibrium is directly proportional
to the concentration in the liquid. We ﬁnd it convenient
to state this equilibrium condition as
[A]equilibrium ¼ SA /C1 p A (3:1:2)
where SA is the solubility of A in units of mmol m /C0 3
atm/C0 1. The solubility is a function of temperature and
salinity. If the ocean is not in equilibrium with the at-
mosphere, as is commonly the case, then [A]
w is not
equal to [A]equilibrium, nor will the partial pressure equiv-
alent of [A]w calculated from (3.1.2) (i.e.,pA
w
¼[A]w =SA)b e
equal to the partial pressure of the gas in the air, pA
a
.
Returning to the anomaly deﬁnitions (3.1.1), we see that
a saturated or equilibrium solution will have an anomaly
of 0. Supersaturated solutions are those that have higher
partial pressures or concentrations in seawater than in
the air, and thus positive anomalies. Supersaturated so-
lutions will tend to lose gas A from the ocean to the air.
Undersaturated solutions have negative anomalies and
tend to gain A from the air. Figures 3.1.1 to 3.1.4 show
concentration anomalies of O
2 and partial pressure
73