value of UA is given by Woolf and Thorpe [1991] for four
gases:
UN2 ¼ 7:2ms /C0 1
UO2 ¼ 9:0ms /C0 1
UCO2 ¼ 49 m s/C0 1
UAr ¼ 9:6ms /C0 1
ð3:3:26Þ
The fractional supersaturation for a typical wind speed
of 7.5 m s
/C0 1 is relatively modest: 1.1% for nitrogen,
0.7% for oxygen, 0.02 % for CO 2, and 0.61% for Ar.
Bubbles have a much smaller impact on CO 2 than the
other gases because it is the most soluble gas of the
four. In the ﬁnal section of this chapter, we will use
equations (3.3.24) to (3.3.26) to estimate the effect of
bubbles on the supersaturation. However, it should be
kept in mind that there is no consensus on how to
represent the impact of bubbles either on the exchange
rate k
w or on the supersaturation De. Many models have
been proposed, and the observations are not consistent
in indicating which does the best at representing the
observations [e.g., Emerson et al. , 1995, 1997; Farmer
et al., 1993; Keeling, 1993b; Schudlich and Emerson , 1996;
Spitzer and Jenkins , 1989; Wallace and Wirick , 1992;
Woolf, 1997; Woolf and Thorpe , 1991].
A ﬁnal point: in this chapter, as in most studies of gas
ﬂuxes, we are interested in determining the average gas
ﬂux over some period of time and region of space over
which the wind speed and concentrations of the gas in
the ocean and partial pressure in the air are varying
in time. Until recently, the long-term average gas ﬂux
was commonly estimated by separately determining
the long-term average wind speed and concentration
anomaly and then plugging these into the correspond-
ing gas transfer velocity and gas exchange formulations.
The ﬂuxes calculated by this incorrect procedure are
biased low relative to what one obtains if one follows the
correct procedure of using the instantaneous wind
speed and concentration anomaly to determine an in-
stantaneous gas ﬂux, and then takes a long-term average
of this instantaneous gas ﬂux. Panel 3.3.1 provides a
detailed explanation of this important problem and
the difference that it makes to the answer that one
obtains.
3.4 Applications
We now address the questions that were raised in the
introduction to this chapter about the distributions of
oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrous oxide. We begin
with a brief overview of the biological and solubility
processes that we need to be aware of and then proceed
to a more detailed application of our gas exchange
models to provide a quantitative analysis.
We saw in chapter 1 that the synthesis of organic
matter in the ocean by phytoplankton can be rep-
resented by the reaction
106CO2 þ 16HNO3 þ H3PO4 þ 78H2O
Ð C106H175O42N16P þ 150O2:
Remineralization is the reverse of this reaction. The net
synthesis of organic matter thus consumes CO
2 and in-
creases O 2. By contrast, remineralization of organic
matter consumes O 2 and increases CO 2. The impact of
these processes on the air-sea gas ﬂuxes will depend on
which predominates in the surface ocean. One would
generally expect organic matter synthesis to predomi-
nate over remineralization in the well-lit surface layers,
and for remineralization to predominate in the thermo-
cline and deep ocean. This being the case, biology should
generally lead to uptake of CO
2 from the atmosphere and
release of O2 back to the atmosphere. However, there are
many situations where rapid upward mixing or upwell-
ing of thermocline and deep waters overwhelms the
surface ocean and leads to CO
2 release to the atmosphere
and O2 uptake from the atmosphere.
Nitrous oxide N 2O is a special case of a gas that is
produced only during the process of remineralization
as a minor byproduct of the oxidation of organic
nitrogen (see chapter 5). Photosynthesis neither pro-
duces nor consumes this gas. The ultimate fate of ni-
trous oxide is destruction in the atmosphere, which
occurs on a timescale of order 120 years [ Prather and
Ehhalt, 2001].
The inﬂuence of solubility on the air-sea gas exchange
depends primarily on the temperature sensitivity illus-
trated in ﬁgure 3.2.1. Heating of the ocean reduces
the solubility, whereas cooling increases it. Thus, if the
surface ocean is allowed to saturate with a gas at some
temperature and then is heated, the water will be-
come supersaturated and degassing will result. Con-
versely, cooling of the water will result in uptake from
the atmosphere. We will refer to these solubility effects
as the ‘‘thermal component.’’ Changes in salinity by
evaporation, rainfall, and river input also affect the sol-
ubility, but are much smaller than the thermal effects.
We turn now to a discussion of the oxygen super-
saturation of order 3% observed over much of the ocean
during the WOCE program (ﬁgure 3.1.2; cf. also map
of ﬁgure 3.1.1). A full characterization of this su-
persaturation requires careful consideration of the
spatial and temporal variability of all the parameters
that affect the gas exchange. We show how this might
be done by considering here a simple example using
global mean values for all the relevant parameters.
Two processes that we consider ﬁrst are the skin
Air-Sea Interface
95