predominantly in the high latitudes, particularly of the
Southern Ocean. The overturning rate in these regions
is too rapid for much of the excess CO
2 to escape to the
atmosphere, but not for O 2 uptake to occur. Thus the
biological component for O 2 is quite large, whereas it is
small for CO 2. By contrast, the thermal component is
more widespread, and in regions where warming is oc-
curring, the water column becomes stratiﬁed and water
stays at the surface for a long time. Thus the thermal
component is much more fully expressed for CO
2 than
the biological component. Chapter 8 has a more com-
plete discussion of these phenomena for CO
2.
One of the most important problems in ocean bio-
geochemistry today is to estimate the uptake of an-
thropogenic carbon by the ocean. This topic is covered
in detail in chapter 10, but we summarize here a set of
estimates of the net air-sea CO
2 ﬂux based on the pCO2
monthly average partial pressure difference data of
Takahashi et al. [2002], which they mapped out over 4
/C14
north-south by 5 /C14 east-west quadrangles around the
world. Their data set included approximately 940,000
measurements obtained since 1956, all of which were
interpolated to 1995. Column (b) of table 3.4.1 gives
results from the study of Wanninkhof et al . [2002] up-
dated by Rik Wanninkhof (personal communication,
2004), which includes the inﬂuence of wind speed
variability on the gas transfer velocity estimate (see
panel 3.3.1). The range from the lowest anthropogenic
carbon uptake estimate to the highest is almost a factor
of 2. Three lines of evidence examined earlier strongly
suggest that the lowest of these estimates based on the
Liss and Merlivat [1986] function is unlikely to be cor-
rect: (1) comparison with empirical estimates of gas
exchange using the radiocarbon observations (ﬁgure
3.3.3), (2) model simulations of bomb radiocarbon up-
take by ocean general circulation models (table 3.3.3),
and (3) comparison of model simulations with oxygen
observations in the atmosphere [ Keeling et al. , 1998].
The skin temperature effect has been estimated to in-
crease the oceanic uptake by 0.4 Pg C yr
/C0 1, i.e., about
25% of the total ([ Van Scoy et al. , 1995], based on the
radiocarbon calibrated linear gas transfer velocity
model of Tans et al . [1990]). However, as noted earlier,
this is likely to be an upper limit.
We conclude with a brief discussion of the nitrous
oxide distribution shown in ﬁgure 3.1.4. One interest-
ing aspect of this distribution is that nitrous oxide is
supersaturated almost everywhere. This is exactly what
we would expect from what we learned about its bio-
geochemistry at the beginning of this section. Another
interesting aspect of this distribution is that the peak
supersaturations are observed in the tropics of the At-
lantic, Paciﬁc, and Indian Oceans. We show in chapter
5 that the highest deep-ocean nitrous oxide concentra-
tions are found in the thermocline waters of the low
latitudes where the remineralization of organic matter
is at a maximum. Since nitrous oxide is a byproduct of
remineralization, this is exactly where we would expect
the nitrous oxide to peak. It is the upwelling of these
waters at the surface that we see manifested in the
tropics in ﬁgure 3.1.4.
There have been numerous attempts to estimate the
ﬂux of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere using observa-
tions such as those shown in ﬁgure 3.1.4 as well as a
range of models. The most recent observationally based
estimate is that of Nevison et al. [2004], who give a global
ocean N
2O degassing ﬂux of 3.7–4.3 Tg yr /C0 1 of N.
This can be compared to a global ‘‘natural’’ (i.e., pre-
anthropogenic) nitrous oxide production rate of 7 (range
of 4 to 12) Tg yr
/C0 1 of N for non-oceanic sources, mostly
soils, given by Prather and Ehhalt [2001]. The oceanic
source thus accounts for about 40% (range of 28% to
51%) of the total pre-anthropogenic input of nitrous
oxide to the atmosphere.
Air-Sea Interface
99