3.6 A recent study by Peacock [2004] suggests that the total ocean inventory of
bomb radiocarbon is about 25% lower than that used by Wanninkhof [1992] to
calibrate his air-sea gas exchange coefﬁcient model. Discuss the implications
of this ﬁnding for the calibration of the air-sea gas exchange coefﬁcient.
3.7 How long does it take for a 100 m deep mixed layer to lose half of its initial
oxygen supersaturation of 5 mmol m
/C0 3? Assume a gas transfer velocity of
20 cm hr/C0 1 and ignore any lateral loss or gain of oxygen or any exchange
across the bottom of the mixed layer.
a. Derive the time-dependent mass balance equation for the oxygen
anomaly, DC in this mixed layer.
b. Solve for the time dependence of the mixed layer oxygen anomaly.
c. Solve for the time t required for DC(t) to drop to half of the initial
oxygen anomaly, DC
initial.
3.8 What equatorial upwelling rate would be required to maintain the oxygen
deﬁcit of about 4 mmol m /C0 3 in the eastern equatorial Paciﬁc (see ﬁgure 3.1.1)
if there were no biological production? Assume that the upwelling water has
an oxygen deﬁcit of 40 mmol m
/C0 3 and that the deﬁcit is zero in the waters at
either side of the axis of upwelling. Assume a mixed layer of 40 m, and a gas
transfer velocity of 10 cm hr
/C0 1.
a. Draw a meridional/depth section of the upwelling system across the
equator. Indicate the directions of the mass (water) ﬂuxes and those
of oxygen.
b. Derive a mass balance equation for oxygen in the mixed layer.
c. Assume steady state and solve for the upwelling velocity.
3.9 Observations from a mooring in the same region of the equatorial Paciﬁc as
in problem 3.8 indicate that the oxygen undersaturation was nearly constant
for an entire month. You now would like to compute the ingassing of oxygen
for this month. The information you have available is the monthly mean
wind speed, i.e., 5 m s
/C0 1, and its standard deviation, ±2 m s /C0 1. Compute the
ingassing of oxygen using the Wanninkhof (1992) parameterization (see table
3.3.2) for a case in which you take the covariance of the wind into account,
and for a case in which this term is neglected. Discuss the reasons for the
difference. Assume a Schmidt number of 660.
3.10 Analyses of the oxygen concentration in raindrops reveals that it is nearly
always very close to oxygen saturation. This is surprising at ﬁrst, since when a
raindrop is formed, it starts with zero oxygen and the lifetime of a raindrop is
only a few minutes. In contrast, we just learned that it takes weeks for a 50 m
deep mixed layer in the ocean to equilibrate with the atmosphere. Explain
how the effective equilibration timescale depends on the geometry of the
problem, and demonstrate how it scales with the size of the raindrop. As-
sume that the raindrop is a perfect sphere. Note: Typical raindrops are
*1 mm in diameter.
Air-Sea Interface
101