Chapter 5
Organic Matter Export and Remineralization
In the previous chapter we examined the uptake of
nutrients to form organic matter by organisms in near-
surface waters of the ocean. We saw that this uptake
forces surface nitrate and phosphate to very low con-
centrations over almost the entire world ocean. It also
reduces the surface concentration of total carbon and
alkalinity, as well as having an impact on the surface
concentration of micronutrients and many trace metals.
We now examine the fate of organic matter that is ex-
ported from the surface. We will see that the majority of
the organic matter exported is remineralized within the
upper few hundred meters of the thermocline, with
only a small but signiﬁcant fraction making it into the
deep ocean. We will also see that our understanding of
the processes determining the remineralization of or-
ganic matter in this ‘‘twilight’’ zone is much less de-
veloped than our understanding of how organic matter
is formed in the euphotic zone. Our approach will
therefore be somewhat more descriptive in comparison
to that we took in chapter 4.
5.1 Introduction
The vast majority of organic matter exported from
near-surface waters is converted back into its inorganic
constituents by heterotrophic organisms within the
water column and sediments, a process referred to
as remineralization. This process is the main energy
source for these organisms, therefore providing a strong
incentive for them to complete remineralization to
the greatest extent possible. The subsequent upward
ﬂux to the surface of remineralized inorganic nutrients
closes the nutrient cycling loop driven by the biological
pump. These processes are depicted schematically in
ﬁgure 5.1.1, which excludes remineralization processes
and burial occurring in the sediments. Figure 5.1.1
separates the organic matter pool into dissolved organic
matter (DOM) and particulate organic matter (POM),
with the difference often deﬁned operationally on the
basis of what goes through a ﬁlter of a particular size
and what does not. Functionally the main difference
between these two pools is that DOM is too small to
sink on its own; therefore its transport is primarily
determined by water transport and mixing. In contrast,
POM is large and heavy enough to sink, so in addi-
tion to water transport and mixing, it has a non-
negligible vertical advection term. In this chapter, we
examine the export of organic matter from the surface
ocean, as well as remineralization in the water column.
In chapter 6, we discuss remineralization in the
sediments.
We begin this section with a ﬁrst look at observa-
tions, and then discuss the two major remineralization
reactions that occur in the water column and that de-
termine the observed distributions. The ﬁrst reaction
uses oxygen as an oxidant, and is therefore termed aer-
obic remineralization . When oxygen is scarce, nitrate
replaces oxygen as the oxidant, leading to a reaction
termed denitriﬁcation. A major focus of this chapter will
be on the inﬂuence of these reactions on the concen-
tration of oxygen and nutrients, which we will show
for the ﬁrst time in this section. However, in order to
study the impact of remineralization on the oxygen
and nutrient distributions, we must ﬁrst separate the
remineralization component from the so-called pre-
formed nutrient concentration transported in from the
surface. The difference between the remineralized and
preformed components is the third subject of this sec-
tion. The ﬁnal topic discussed in this section is the
deﬁnition of particulate versus dissolved organic matter.
Nutrient and Oxygen Distributions
To trace the impact of remineralization reactions on
the distribution of nutrients and oxygen, we show in
173