ﬁgures 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 the variations of these tracers
along a global-scale section that is identical to that used
earlier in this text for other tracers (see map in ﬁgure
2.3.3a). We can clearly identify the impact of ocean bi-
ology in the form of surface depletion and deep enrich-
ment of nitrate and phosphate, and the corresponding
decrease in deep ocean oxygen.
We can investigate this apparent coupling between
the two nutrients and oxygen by plotting nitrate and
oxygen versus phosphate (ﬁgure 5.1.4) using data from
all depths. A tight correspondence exists between ni-
trate and phosphate (ﬁgure 5.1.4a), with a mean slope
of about 16:1, very similar to the relationship that we
observed for near-surface waters (ﬁgure 4.2.1). It thus
appears that most of the remineralization of nitrate and
phosphate can be understood simply as the reverse of
the photosynthesis reaction (4.2.4). However, we also
observe distinct trends in the various ocean basins, with
the Atlantic Ocean, for example, having substantially
higher nitrate concentrations relative to phosphate. In
contrast, the Indian Ocean appears to be depleted in
nitrate relative to the mean trend. Do these variations
indicate inter-basin trends in the N:P stoichiometry of
remineralization of organic matter, or are they driven
by other processes? We will see that most of these ni-
trate ‘‘anomalies’’ are not driven by stoichiometric
variations, but are caused by the removal of nitrate by
denitriﬁcation and the addition of nitrate stemming
from the remineralization of nitrogen-rich organic matter
formed by N
2-ﬁxers, i.e., organisms that can use dini-
trogen gas (N 2) as a source of nitrogen.
Given the overall strong coupling between nitrate and
phosphate, the absence of such a coupling between ox-
ygen and phosphate in ﬁgure (5.1.4b) is at ﬁrst sur-
prising. If remineralization of organic matter were to
dominate the interior ocean distribution of these two
tracers, we would expect all points to lie along a line with
a slope of about /C0 170:1. This is clearly not the case. Is it
the denitriﬁcation reaction mentioned above that de-
couples phosphate from O
2? The tight correspondence
between nitrate and phosphate in ﬁgure 5.1.4a suggests
that this process is unlikely the main cause. Therefore,
other processes must be responsible for the decoupling.
The only place where this decoupling can occur is the
surface ocean, where oxygen can exchange with the at-
mosphere, while nutrients do not. These signals gen-
erated near the surface are then transported into the
interior ocean as preformed concentrations. All subse-
quent changes arising from remineralization are chan-
ges relative to these preformed concentrations.
A useful reference point for the preformed concen-
tration is a conservative tracer such as salinity that is
inﬂuenced by the circulation but not affected by biolog-
ical processes. Figure 2.4.1 shows salinity along the same
section as displayed for nitrate and phosphate in ﬁgure
5.1.3a and b. The three tracers have almost identical
patterns in the deep North Atlantic and in the deeper part
of the southern hemisphere thermocline, but very
0 m
EUPHOTIC ZONE
APHOTIC ZONE
~100 m
INORGANIC
NUTRIENTS DISSOLVED
OM
PARTICULATE
OM
ORGANIC MATTER
Net 
production
INORGANIC
NUTRIENTS DISSOLVED
OM
PARTICULATE
OM
ORGANIC MATTER
Remineralization
Circulation
Circulation
 Particle Settling
Figure 5.1.1: Schematic of the production and remineralization of organic matter in the ocean. Particulate organic
matter ( POM) and dissolved organic matter ( DOM ) are formed in the euphotic zone and then exported by sinking
(POM) or by transport and mixing ( POM and DOM ). In the aphotic zone, DOM and POM are subject to
remineralization, which returns the inorganic constituents back to seawater. Similar processes occur in the sediments,
from where the solutes then diffuse back into the water column.
174
Chapter 5