different patterns in the deep Paciﬁc and low-latitude
thermocline. The strong similarity in the deep
North Atlantic and the deeper parts of the southern
hemisphere thermocline suggest that preformed con-
centrations play a major role in determining the overall
nutrient and oxygen distributions in the interior ocean. If
we are to understand the contribution of remineraliza-
tion to the water column distributions, we need a way of
separating its inﬂuence from that of the preformed
concentration. A method exists to do this, but before we
can explain it, we ﬁrst need to understand more about the
remineralization reactions.
Remineralization Reactions
Most of the water column remineralization of organic
matter occurs by the reverse of the organic matter syn-
thesis reaction at the surface of the ocean depicted by
(4.2.4), i.e.,
C106H175O42N16P þ150 O2
Ð 106 CO2 þ16 HNO3 þH3PO4 þ78 H2O( 5 :1:1)
However, the C:N:P:O 2 stoichiometry of the reminer-
alization reaction below 400 m (which is the only depth
interval where such estimates have been made on a
global scale) appears to be somewhat different:
Corganic:N:P:O2
¼ (117 /C6 14) : (16/C6 1) : (1) : (/C0 170 /C6 10) (5:1:2)
([Anderson and Sarmiento 1994]; see panel 4.2.1). Note
that the O 2 in (5.1.2) refers only to the free dissolved
oxygen that is removed from the water by the reminer-
alization reaction. It does not include the oxygen that is
bound up in organic matter. The technique used to ob-
tain the estimate of remineralization stoichiometry given
by (5.1.2) did not permit an estimate of the absolute
amount of H and O in organic matter. This is because we
are unable to detect the water produced by the full re-
mineralization reaction such as illustrated by (5.1.1).
The conversion of nitrogen in organic matter to
dissolved inorganic nitrate in (5.1.1) actually occurs in
three distinct steps: ammoniﬁcation, ammonium oxida-
tion, and nitrite oxidation, where the latter two processes
in combination are often referred to as nitriﬁcation (see
ﬁgure 5.1.5). We explain these here, as we will be ex-
amining the nitrogen cycle in some detail in this
chapter. Ammoniﬁcation is the transformation of or-
ganic nitrogen to ammonium, NH
4þ . Since organic ni-
trogen is mostly at the same reduced oxidation state as
ammonium, i.e., N(-III), this step usually does not in-
volve a redox reaction, i.e., the transfer of an electron
from one molecule to another. Nitriﬁcation refers to the
oxidation of ammonium to nitrate. This step is done by
nitrifying bacteria, which specialize in using the energy
from this reaction to take up CO
2 and synthesize organic
matter from it. They are therefore, like phytoplankton,
autotrophic organisms, except that they use a chemical
reaction rather than sunlight as a source of energy. The
nitrifying bacteria are thus referred to as chemoauto-
trophs. The two steps of nitriﬁcation, i.e., ammonium
oxidation (the oxidation of ammonium to nitrite, NO
/C0
2
)
and nitrite oxidation (the conversion of nitrite to nitrate)
are most often done by distinct groups of organisms. The
best known are Nitrosomonas spp ., an ammonium oxi-
dizer, and Nitrobacter spp., a nitrite oxidizer. Nitriﬁcation
requires the presence of oxygen and tends to be inhibited
by light, as noted in chapter 4. To summarize, the fol-
lowing three distinct reactions remineralize organic ni-
trogen to nitrate:
Ammonification : org :N Ð NH4
þ
Ammonium oxidation : 2NH 4
þ þ3O2
! 2NO/C0
2
þ4H þ þ2H2O
Nitrite oxidation : 2NO /C0
2
þO2 ! 2NO/C0
3
(5:1:3)
NO3
–
NO2
–
V
I
II
III
0
-III NH4
+
Organic Nitrogen
Ammonification
Assimilation
Nitrate Assimilation
Nitrite
oxidation
Ammonium oxidation
Nitrification
Oxidation
 state
Nitrite Assimilation
IV
N2-fixation
N2
DenitrificationN2O
Anammox
Figure 5.1.5: Transformation pathways of nitrogen in the ocean.
Most of the ﬁxed nitrogen atoms in the ocean follow a pathway
that consists of NO
/C0
3
and NH4
þ uptake by phytoplankton, followed
by ammoniﬁcation (the conversion of organic N to NH 4þ ). The
resulting NH4
þ is then oxidized in two reaction steps back to
NO/C0
3
, collectively referred to as nitriﬁcation. Under anoxic
conditions, NO/C0
3
gets used as an oxidant in bacterial respiration
processes, termed denitriﬁcation, leading to its stepwise reduction
to N2.N 2 can also be ﬁxed into organic matter by a few specialized
organisms, called diazotrophs, balancing the loss of ﬁxed
nitrogen in the ocean. N 2O gets produced as a side-product in
association with both nitriﬁcation and denitriﬁcation. N 2 can also
be produced by the reaction of NH þ
4
with NO/C0
2
, a process
called Anammox.
178
Chapter 5