The remineralization reaction depicted by (5.1.1) re-
quires oxygen and, except for many bacteria, is used by
nearly all heterotrophic organisms, including all zoo-
plankton, and ﬁsh. Most bacteria use this aerobic re-
mineralization reaction as well, since the energy yield
per unit of organic matter is higher in comparison to
all other available oxidants. Most organisms are strict
aerobes, i.e., they cannot switch to another oxidant for
oxidizing organic matter to provide energy for their
metabolism, and so they cannot live in the absence of
free oxygen. However, many bacteria are more ﬂexible
and can use a wide range of other reactions to obtain
energy from organic matter (see detailed discussion in
chapter 6). The most common anaerobic process in the
water column is denitriﬁcation. In the denitriﬁcation
process, nitrate replaces oxygen as the oxidant, and is
thereby reduced to N
2. The overall denitriﬁcation reac-
tion for organic matter of composition (5.1.1) is:
C106H175O42N16P þ 104 HNO 3
! 106 CO 2 þ 60 N 2 þ H3PO4 þ 138 H 2O (5:1:4)
[Gruber and Sarmiento , 1997]. Unfortunately, it is not
possible to work out the correct denitriﬁcation stoichi-
ometry for organic matter with the deep ocean re-
mineralization stoichiometry (5.1.2). This is because
(5.1.2) does not include the correct organic O and H
stoichiometry, as noted above.
Another anaerobic process that removes ﬁxed nitro-
gen from the water is the anaerobic ammonium oxida-
tion (anammox) process, in which bacteria combine
ammonium and nitrite to form N
2 under anoxic con-
ditions. This process, ﬁrst discovered in wastewater
bioreactors, appears to occur also in oceanic environ-
ments (see, e.g., Kuypers et al. [2003]). Its quantitative
signiﬁcance is not known yet on a global scale, but a
recent study suggested that the anammox process could
be responsible for most of the ﬁxed nitrogen loss in the
oxygen minimum zone of the Benguela upwelling
system [ Kuypers et al. , 2005]. We won’t discuss this
process further, but note that from a geochemical per-
spective, the anammox and denitriﬁcation processes
play the same role in that they remove nitrate from the
water while adding phosphate from the associated re-
mineralization of organic phosphorus.
The loss of ﬁxed nitrogen by denitriﬁcation and the
anammox process requires a counterbalancing source
elsewhere if the nitrate content of the ocean is to re-
main constant through time. The primary source is the
N
2 ﬁxation reaction discussed in the previous chapter.
The N 2 ﬁxation reaction converts N 2 to organic nitro-
gen, which ends up as nitrate upon subsequent reac-
tion of the organic matter with oxygen. The extent to
which the oceanic ﬁxed nitrogen budget is actually in
balance is controversial at present, as will be discussed
below [e.g., McElroy, 1983; Codispoti and Christensen ,
1985; Gruber and Sarmiento , 1997; Codispoti et al. , 2001;
Gruber, 2004].
Not all nitrogen contained in organic matter in re-
actions (5.1.1) and (5.1.4) gets completely converted to
nitrate or N
2. Some small fraction ends up as nitrous
oxide, N 2O, part of which is then emitted into the at-
mosphere. We have seen in chapter 3 that N 2O, like
CO2, acts as a greenhouse gas; therefore variations of
this gas in the atmosphere can lead to changes in
Earth’s temperature and climate. As we will see below,
the oceanic production of N
2O constitutes a substantial
fraction of the total emission of N 2O into the atmo-
sphere. It therefore behooves us to understand the
processes that form N
2O in the ocean and what controls
them. In the case of aerobic remineralization, the for-
mation of N
2O is associated with the oxidation of am-
monium during nitriﬁcation (ﬁgure 5.1.5). Nitrous
oxide is also formed during denitriﬁcation, as it repre-
sents an intermediate product during the reduction of
nitrate to N
2 (ﬁgure 5.1.5). If some of this N 2O escapes
the further reduction to N 2, denitriﬁcation can act as a
source of N 2O. At the same time, denitriﬁcation can act
as a sink for N 2O, with the overall balance generally
believed to be positive, i.e., denitriﬁcation acting as a
net source of N
2O. The relative importance of the two
production pathways is still debated, but it appears as if
the majority of the N
2O in the ocean is formed in as-
sociation with nitriﬁcation [ Suntharalingam and Sar-
miento, 2000; Nevison et al. , 2003; Jin and Gruber , 2003].
However, given the much higher yield of N 2O at low
oxygen concentrations, the production is biased toward
the low-oxygen regions of the world ocean. We will
discuss the impact of this on the oceanic distribution of
N
2O, thereby permitting us to explain the distribution
of surface N 2O we brieﬂy covered in chapter 3.
Preformed and Remineralized Components
In the most general form, we can think of the nutrient
or oxygen concentration of a water parcel in the interior
of the ocean as consisting of two components. The ﬁrst
is the preformed concentration, C
preformed, that this
water parcel had when it left the surface, and the sec-
ond one is the change in concentration, DC
remin,t h a t
occurred since that time as a result of remineraliza-
tion, i.e.,
Cobserved ¼ Cpreformed þ DCremin (5:1:5)
We can use the three-box ocean model of ﬁgure 1.2.5
to provide a more detailed illustration of the difference
between the preformed and remineralized components
of deep ocean nutrient concentrations. If we assume
that the low-latitude surface nutrient concentration C
l
is 0, such as would be the case for nitrate or phos-
phate over much of the ocean, the ﬂux balance of the
179
Export and Remineralization