low-latitude surface box gives for the low-latitude or-
ganic matter export and deep water remineralization
term F
l the expression:
Fl ¼ T /C1Cd (5:1:6)
where T is the rate of upwelling associated with the
thermohaline overturning, and Cd is the deep ocean
nutrient concentration. Recall that this model ignores
sediment burial, so the ﬂux of organic matter to the
deep ocean is equal to the rate of remineralization in
the deep ocean. This equation tells us that the export
of organic matter from the low-latitude surface box is
equal to the nutrient input by upwelling.
The high-latitude surface box also has an organic
matter export ﬂux and deep water remineralization
equal to the net input of nutrients by ocean circulation.
However, the expression is more complicated because
the high-latitude nutrient concentration C
h is not zero:
Fh ¼ fhd /C1Cd /C0 ( fhd þ T ) /C1Ch (5:1:7)
The transport term fhd represents the two-way exchange
of surface high-latitude waters with the deep ocean. It
brings deep ocean water to the surface and exports
surface high-latitude water to the deep ocean in com-
bination with the thermohaline transport term T.
Summing (5.1.6) and (5.1.7) and solving them for the
deep ocean concentration gives the expression
Cd ¼ Ch þ Fl þ Fh
fhd þ T (5:1:8)
From this we see that the deep ocean concentration is
made up of the high latitude concentration C
h brought
in from the surface outcrop region, which is the pre-
formed concentration, C
preformed, and a second compo-
nent due to the remineralization of organic matter di-
vided by the total rate of deep water formation. This
second term is equal to DC
remin. The ﬁrst problem we
discuss in section 5.2 is how to separate the preformed
component from the remineralized component. The
most useful tracer for this purpose is oxygen, because
we are able to estimate its surface, i.e., preformed,
concentration. We do this by assuming it is at or near
equilibrium with the atmosphere.
The second problem we discuss in section 5.2 is how
to estimate the rate of organic matter remineralization
based on the rate of oxygen utilization. Rearranging
(5.1.8) to solve for the sum of the two export ﬂuxes,
which in steady state are equal to the total interior
ocean remineralization rate, gives the expression
Fl þ Fh ¼ (Cd /C0 Ch) /C1( fhd þ T )( 5 :1:9)
We can estimate the rate of remineralization if we
know the portion of the concentration that is due to
remineralization, i.e., the difference between in situ and
preformed concentration, this being the solution to the
ﬁrst problem discussed in section 5.2, and if we know
the rate of ocean circulation. The problem of estimating
the remineralization rate from oxygen thus reduces to
determining the rate of ocean circulation.
The three-box model is, of course, highly simpliﬁed.
The actual distribution of nutrients in the deep ocean
results from a complex interplay between the layered
pattern of thermocline and deep ocean circulation dis-
cussed in chapter 2, and the remineralization of organic
matter exported from the surface ocean. We use ob-
servations of tracers to help us determine ocean circu-
lation rates.
Dissolved and Particulate Organic Matter
Remineralization cannot occur without a continu-
ous supply of organic matter. Chemical oceanogra-
phers generally classify organic matter as either partic-
ulate (POM) or dissolved ( DOM). DOM is operationally
deﬁned as the component of organic matter that passes
through a ﬁlter of a given pore size, commonly 0.45 mm.
However, this deﬁnition is not entirely satisfactory. For
one thing, such a ﬁlter lets through many or most of the
bacteria [ Lee and Fuhrman , 1987]. Bacteria can only be
removed by a 0.2 or 0.4 mm pore membrane ﬁlter. For
another thing, even this smaller size range allows col-
loids through (see review by Fuhrman [1992]). Colloids
have been operationally deﬁned as particles with a mo-
lecular weight above 10,000 and having a size smaller
than about 0.4 mm[ Baskaran et al ., 1992]. To complicate
matters, the measurement of organic matter, except in
coastal environments, is now often made on water
samples that have not been ﬁltered. The measurement
that is obtained is thus total organic matter ( TOM). This
is done so as to avoid problems with contamination that
arise from handling the samples, and because in open
ocean environments, the contribution from POM is very
small, so that DOM is very nearly equal to TOM there
[Sharp et al., 1993; Sharp, 2002]. In coastal waters, where
the contribution from POM is large, samples are usually
ﬁltered. To avoid confusion, we will continue to use the
term DOM, even when the actual measurement was
actually TOM.
Although the separation of organic matter into DOM
and POM is largely driven by its operational simplicity,
one of the primary merits is that the resulting DOM
includes all organic matter that is either truly dissolved
or in particulate form, but nonsinking. We can there-
fore regard DOM as that component of organic matter
that is transported by ocean circulation and mixing,
whereas POM is that component for which sinking is
important. Another argument for this separation is that
the pool sizes of these two components are very dif-
ferent. In terms of carbon, the dissolved pool comprises
about 700 Pg C (1 Pg ¼ 10
15 g), which is larger than the
180
Chapter 5