and one outﬂow. The inﬂowing waters are found to have an AOU of
140 mmol m/C0 3, and the outﬂowing waters an AOU of 200 mmol m/C0 3. The
ﬂow rate of the inﬂowing waters has been determined from a 14C budget and
estimated to be about 5 Sv (5 /C2 106 m3 s/C0 1). The volume of the deep Indian
Ocean is about 8.0 /C2 1016 m3.
a. Draw a schematic of the circulation of the deep Indian Ocean.
b. Derive a mass conservation equation for AOU in the deep Indian Ocean.
c. Assume steady state and solve the mass conservation equation for the
oxygen utilization rate ( OUR) in units of mmol m
/C0 3 y/C0 1.
d. Discuss the result found in (c) and compare it with the estimates of
OUR in the deep Atlantic and deep Paciﬁc given in table 5.2.1.
5.8 Figure 5.3.8 shows very low N* values in the thermocline of the northern
Indian Ocean and in the thermocline of the eastern tropical Paciﬁc.
a. Deﬁne and discuss the meaning of N*.
b. What process is most likely responsible for generating these low N*
values?
c. Discuss the occurrence of these low N* values in relation to what
you know about large-scale ocean circulation and ocean reminera-
lization.
5.9 Observations show that the oxygen content of the main thermocline of
the Paciﬁc Ocean has decreased in recent decades. Global climate change
simulations indicate that the buildup of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere may lead to a slowdown of the ventilation of thermocline
waters, and it has been suggested by some scientists that this may be the
cause of the oxygen decrease. Answer the following questions assuming
that such a slowdown of the thermocline ventilation has indeed occurred.
Base your answer on the thermocline ventilation diagram shown in ﬁgure
2.3.9, i.e., assume that you can represent an isopycnal layer as a single slab
with a single outcrop.
a. Suppose that the export of organic matter from the surface to the
isopycnal surfaces of the main thermocline remains unaffected by
the ventilation slowdown. What kind of change would you expect for
the oxygen and AOU concentrations in the thermocline?
b. Now suppose that the biological export production decreased as a result
of this slowdown, because of the smaller vertical supply of nutrients to
the surface euphotic zone. What kind of effect do you expect now for
oxygen and AOU?
c. Finally, global climate change not only affects the thermocline venti-
lation, but also leads to a warming of the waters. How does the warming
of the waters affect oxygen and AOU?
5.10 Iron fertilization has been proposed as a way to increase the export production
of organic matter out of the surface ocean, with the goal of thereby inducing an
uptake of CO
2 from the atmosphere. Given what you have learned about the
cycling of N2O in the ocean, discuss the potential implications of an increase in
export production on the marine production of N 2O.
5.11 This problem asks you to separate the phosphate concentration into
remineralized and preformed concentrations and explain the resulting
223
Export and Remineralization