distributions. Use the global mean vertical proﬁle given at the end of the
problem set.
a. Do a plot of temperature versus salinity and label the major deep water
types: AAIW (Antarctic Intermediate Water), NADW (North Atlantic
Deep Water), and AABW (Antarctic Bottom Water). Can you also
identify the Subtropical Mode Water (a salinity maximum commonly
found in the upper thermocline)?
b. Plot AOU versus depth and discuss its major features, including their
association with water types. Also explain why the maximum in AOU
occurs at about 1000 m.
c. Calculate preformed and remineralized phosphate and plot both of
them versus depth (preformed alone, and total ¼ preformed þ
remineralized). Discuss the major features of their distributions.
Note, in particular, that most of the phosphate in the ocean is
preformed.
5.12 The opal in diatoms grown with adequate light and nutrients is observed
to have a Si:N ratio of Si(OH)
4 about 1. Suppose we use this observation to
deﬁne a Si* tracer as Si* ¼ Si(OH)4 /C0 NO/C0
3
. Use the global horizontal mean
data at the end of the problem set to calculate Si* and plot this versus depth.
What conclusions can you draw about the cycling of silicate versus nitrate
from the distribution of Si*?
5.13 A detailed analysis of sediment trap observations from the Arabian Sea and a
few other places has suggested that the sinking velocity of particles may
increase with depth. Derive analytically the shape of the POC ﬂux as a
function of depth, i.e., F(z) ¼/C0 w
sink /C1POC (analogous to equation (5.4.12))
given the assumptions that the sinking velocity is a linear function of
depth, i.e., w
sink ¼ b /C1z; that the remineralization of POC is a ﬁrst-order
reaction with a rate constant kremin; and that there is no net POC production.
Discuss the implications of this result for the POC ﬂux equation (5.4.3)
versus (5.4.12).
5.14 Preformed inorganic phosphorus: You saw in problem 5.11(c) that most of
the phosphate in the ocean is preformed. Preformed phosphate is conserved
except at the surface of the ocean, where it can be taken up by phytoplankton
and converted to organic phosphorus.
a. Write down the vertical one-dimensional conservation equation for the
steady-state distribution of preformed inorganic phosphorus. Assume
here and in the remainder of these problems that advection and dif-
fusion are constant with depth.
b. Give a solution to the equation in (a) using as boundary conditions
that the surface concentration is PIP(0) and the concentration at
z ¼ H is PIP(H). Use the symbol z* for the exponential scale
depth K/w.
c. Use a spreadsheet to calculate and plot the preformed phosphate given
by your solution in (a) for the depth interval from 0 to /C0 500 m. Use the
observed preformed phosphate from problem 5.11(c) to specify the
boundary concentrations at z ¼ 0 and H ¼/C0 500 m. Add the data from
problem 5.11(c) to your plot and convince yourself that a value of
z* ¼ 2000 m does a reasonable job of ﬁtting these data (which have a
kink in the middle due mostly to lateral processes).
PROBLEMS 5.14 TO 5.16:
These problems form a sequence
that will take you through the de-
velopment of a simple vertical one-
dimensional advection ( w) diffusion
(K ) model of the distribution of
preformed inorganic phosphorus
(PIP), organic phosphorus ( OP),
and remineralized inorganic phos-
phorus ( RIP). Assume horizontal
exchange is negligible. These
problems will give you insight into
the processes that control the
vertical distribution of nutrients
in the ocean.
Chapter 5
224