Chapter 8
Carbon Cycle
Having completed our ﬁrst grand tour of ocean bio-
geochemical cycles by reviewing and discussing the
oceanic cycling of silicate, we are now ready to assess
the marine carbon cycle, one of the most important and
also most fascinating biogeochemical cycles in the
ocean. In discussing this cycle, we will need to employ
all the concepts that have been introduced and dis-
cussed in the previous chapters. In this chapter we will
study how the marine carbon cycle works and how this
cycle is connected with the atmospheric CO
2 concen-
tration. We will see that the oceans contain approxi-
mately 60 times more carbon than the atmosphere and
that the ocean therefore exerts a dominant control on
atmospheric CO
2. We will introduce the concepts nec-
essary to understand this fact and also discuss how
biological and physical processes act together to reduce
the surface concentration of inorganic carbon relative to
the deep ocean. Without this reduction, atmospheric
CO
2 would increase by more than 150 ppm, with the
exact magnitude depending on the ocean carbon cycle
model.
Our ability to understand and model the carbon
cycle in the oceans has made large advances over the
last twenty years since the Geochemical Ocean Section
Study (GEOSECS) provided a ﬁrst complete picture of
the inorganic carbon distribution in the oceans. The
recently completed Global Ocean CO
2 Survey, a joint
effort between the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
(JGOFS) and the World Ocean Circulation Experiment
(WOCE), provides us now with almost two orders of
magnitude more data with improved precision and
accuracy. Analysis and interpretation of this new data
set has just begun, and it quite surely will provide us
with many new insights on details of the marine
carbon cycle. Over the last ten years, several global
models of the carbon cycle in the oceans have been
developed and successfully applied to many interesting
questions. These models also increasingly incorpo-
rate the relevant processes prognostically, thus offering
the opportunity to employ the models in conditions
other than the current climate. However, there still
exist large gaps in our understanding of several key
issues.
Probably the largest puzzle in ocean carbon research
is our inability to explain the large glacial-interglacial
variations in atmospheric CO
2. As the oceans contain
60 times more carbon than the atmosphere and 17
times more carbon than is stored in the terrestrial
biosphere (see ﬁgure 10.1.1), the causes for these vari-
ations must lie within the oceans. This lack of knowl-
edge also hampers our ability to predict more reliably
how the oceanic carbon cycle is going to change in the
future as a result of human-induced climate change.
The investigation of natural variability might offer
some insight into how the marine carbon cycle re-
sponds to changes in the climatic state, but little is
known regarding the role of the oceans on interannual
to decadal timescales. While considerable advances
have been made in pinning down the role of the oceans
as a sink for anthropogenic CO
2, there still exists large
uncertainties, especially regarding future uptake. We
will deal with these outstanding issues in the last
chapter of this book (chapter 10).
We start this chapter with an introduction that es-
tablishes a number of problems that provide a focal
point for the discussion in the remainder of the chap-
ter. We then construct the building blocks for answer-
ing most questions by introducing the inorganic carbon
chemistry in seawater. Afterward we look at the pro-
cesses that control surface ocean partial pressure of
CO
2 and its seasonal variability. The last section ex-
tends the view into the water column by discussing the
causes for the vertical variations of dissolved inorganic
carbon and alkalinity.
318