form bicarbonate and carbonate ions. This topic will be
covered in section 8.2. We will then investigate the
controls on surface ocean pCO
2 in detail in section 8.3.
Although atmospheric CO 2 is controlled by surface
ocean properties (i.e., temperature, salinity, DIC, and
Alk), it is the deep ocean concentrations of DIC and Alk
that ultimately determine the surface concentrations of
these two chemicals and hence atmospheric CO
2. Fig-
ure 8.1.2 shows that the surface concentration of DIC is
about 15% lower than deep ocean concentrations, while
the gradient for Alk amounts to only about 5%. What
are the mechanisms that maintain these gradients
against the continuous action of ocean transport and
mixing, which try to homogenize the ocean tracer dis-
tributions? Since these mechanisms operate against a
gradient, they are often referred to as ‘‘pumps.’’ The
importance of these pumps becomes immediately clear
when we turn them off and allow the ocean to ho-
mogenize completely (cf. also ﬁgure 4.1.3). The three-
box model described in chapter 1 (ﬁgure 1.2.5) predicts
that atmospheric CO
2 would rise from the preindustrial
level of about 280 ppm to more than 420 ppm, i.e., an
increase of about 50% [Gruber and Sarmiento , 2002]!
Given the importance of carbon for organisms, we
expect that ocean biology constitutes such a pump. This
would imply that DIC and Alk should have a distribution
similar to phosphate. This indeed appears to be the case
when we compare the sections of DIC and Alk (ﬁgures
8.1.3) with those of nitrate and phosphate (ﬁgure 5.1.2).
Note that we normalized DIC and Alk here to constant
salinity in order to remove variations due to the addition
and removal of freshwater by precipitation and evapo-
ration. We will be using the symbols sDIC and sAlk to
distinguish these salinity-normalized concentrations (see
detailed discussion in the next section below). Is biology
the whole answer to our question of what causes the
vertical DIC variations? If biological processes were the
only ones affecting phosphate and sDIC, then all oceanic
observations would lie on a single line on a plot of sDIC
versus phosphate. This is because plants appear to take
up CO
2 in a nearly constant ratio relative to phosphate
(see discussion in panel 4.2.1). During respiration and
remineralization processes, both carbon and phosphate
are then returned in dissolved inorganic form to the
seawater in the same ratios (see discussion on stoichio-
metric ratios in chapter 5).
Figure 8.1.4a reveals that this is only partially the case.
While most of the points indeed lie clustered around a
line with a slope predicted from the stoichiometric ratio
of photosynthesis and remineralization, the data also
exhibit substantial systematic offsets from such a trend.
In general, the data lie below the biological trend line for
low concentrations and lie above the trend line for high
concentrations. Clearly, processes other than photo-
synthesis, respiration, and remineralization play a role
in creating the variations seen in sDIC. As shown in the
inset, these processes are air-sea gas exchange and the
formation and dissolution of mineral calcium carbon-
ate, which affect sDIC but do not change phosphate. For
example, given the strong relationship between sDIC
and temperature (ﬁgure 8.1.4b), which follows roughly
an expected trend deﬁned by the temperature sensitivity
of the DIC concentration in equilibrium with a ﬁxed
atmospheric CO
2, variations in temperature quite
clearly must play a role as well. Determination of the
relative role of these processes in controlling the distri-
bution of DIC will be covered in section 8.4.
What about the processes controlling alkalinity? Given
the much smaller variations in sAlk relative to the vari-
ations in sDIC (ﬁgures 8.1.2 and 8.1.3), one might think
that these processes are not particularly important in
controlling atmospheric CO
2. However, on timescales
of millenia and longer, such as associated with the
glacial-interglacial changes in atmospheric CO
2, the
cycling of alkalinity within the ocean and its sediments
emerges as a key component controlling atmospheric
CO
2. The main processes controlling the cycling of al-
kalinity are the biological production of mineral cal-
cium carbonates (CaCO
3) in the surface ocean and
dissolution of these minerals in the water column and
in the sediments. We will introduce the basic chemistry
of these reactions in this chapter, but discuss the
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Depth (m)
2000 2100 2200 2300 2400
DIC, Alk (µmol kg-1)
DIC
sDIC
Alk
sAlk
Figure 8.1.2: Horizontally averaged proﬁles of DIC and Alk in the
global oceans. Also shown are the proﬁles of their salinity normalized
concentrations, sDIC, and sAlk, computed by dividing the measured
concentrations by the measured salinity and then multiplying the
result with a standard salinity of 35. Based on the gridded climato-
logical data from the GLODAP project [ Key et al ., 2004].
320
Chapter 8