large spring bloom, whereas the development of such
a bloom is strongly attenuated in the North Paciﬁc (see
ﬁgure 4.3.14) for reasons not completely understood. We
have mentioned zooplankton grazing and iron limitation
as the two main hypotheses, with evidence accumulating
that iron is the lead cause. This thus represents a re-
markable example of the impact of iron limitation of
phytoplankton on the upper ocean carbon cycle.
8.4 Water Column
We learned in the introduction that the surface con-
centration of sDIC is lower than the deep ocean con-
centration by about 15% (ﬁgure 8.1.2). This vertical
gradient has major consequences for atmospheric car-
bon dioxide. If the ocean were to be mixed uniformly,
models show that atmospheric CO
2 would climb by
more than 50% as previously noted. It is thus of con-
siderable importance to understand what ‘‘gradient
makers’’ act to maintain the sDIC gradient in the face
of ocean circulation and mixing, which are continu-
ously trying to weaken and alter these gradients.
We have identiﬁed two biological processes that con-
tribute toward creating the vertical gradient of sDIC: the
soft-tissue pump and the carbonate pump . We have also
seen that air-sea gas exchange, responding to changes
in surface ocean pCO
2, which in turn are driven by
changes in temperature, DIC, and Alk variations, can
also lead to variations in oceanic sDIC. We will refer to
this process as the gas exchange pump , although the
word ‘‘pump’’ is not really appropriate here, since this
process acts only in the surface ocean. It is, in fact,
ocean circulation and mixing that takes these gas ex-
change–induced surface ocean variations and trans-
ports/mixes them into the ocean interior, leading then
to vertical gradients in sDIC. Note that our deﬁnition of
the gas exchange pump is different from the classical
deﬁnition of the solubility pump by Volk and Hoffert
[1985]. As we will demonstrate below, the solubility
pump is a component of the gas exchange pump.
We expect on the basis of the strong covariation be-
tween sDIC and phosphate (ﬁgure 8.1.4a) that the soft-
tissue pump likely plays a major role. However, ﬁgure
8.1.4b also reveals that variations in sDIC roughly track
a trend versus temperature that is expected from
the temperature sensitivity of the equilibrium sDIC con-
centration for a constant atmospheric CO
2 concentra-
tion. Clearly, both processes, soft-tissue pump and
temperature variations driving the gas exchange pump,
could by themselves explain the majority of the sDIC
variations, but they cannot do so simultaneously. Which
one is dominating, and what is the role of the third
process, i.e., the carbonate pump?
Outline
We will tackle this question by breaking the sDIC ob-
servations down into individual components that can be
identiﬁed with the three different pumps. We introduce
this breakdown by going through a sequence in which
we separately consider the distribution if only one or two
of these processes are simultaneously active. We will see
that we can associate the soft-tissue pump directly with
variations in phosphate, and the carbonate pump with
variations in nitrate-corrected alkalinity, giving us then
the gas exchange component as a residual from the ob-
served sDIC distribution once the anthropogenic CO
2
component has been subtracted.
We then discuss the distribution of each component
in turn, noting that the distribution of the soft-tissue
pump harbors few suprises, while the carbonate pump
component reveals some interesting new features. The
most interesting component is the gas exchange com-
ponent, which shows a completely unexpected distri-
bution. We attempt to unravel the reasons behind this
puzzling pattern, ﬁrst looking at the global distribution
only, and then analyzing regional differences. We will
see that the key to understanding this distribution is the
fact that heating- and cooling-induced air-sea CO
2 ﬂuxes
and biologically induced air-sea CO 2 ﬂuxes often oppose
each other. The resulting CO 2 ﬂux pattern is further
modiﬁed by the relatively long timescale of air-sea ex-
change of CO
2, so that surface waters are seldom in
equilibrium with atmospheric CO 2. This causes a sub-
stantial difference between the ‘‘potential’’ gas exchange
pump, i.e., the oceanic sDIC pattern that would exist if
surface waters were fully equilibrated, and the actually
observed gas exchange pump. In section 8.5, we connect
the ocean interior distribution of the gas exchange
component with surface ﬂuxes, permitting us to inves-
tigate in greater detail the consequences of the opposing
trends of heat ﬂuxes and biology on the gas exchange
pump and how kinetic limitations alter the ﬂux pattern.
Pump Components
We start our pump separation with a thought experi-
ment using a two-dimensional, i.e., latitude-depth
model of the ocean, but focus on the mean vertical gra-
dient of sDIC only. We then use the insights from this
thought experiment to deﬁne the pump components
more rigorously. The approach we follow here is ex-
plained in more detail in Gruber and Sarmiento [2002].
Our ﬁrst experiment considers an ocean that has no gas
exchange and no biology, but a realistic temperature
distribution. As the inhibition of air-sea gas exchange
prevents the expression of the temperature-dependent
342
Chapter 8