solubility, such an ocean would have uniform DIC con-
centration, except for small variations induced by the ad-
dition or removal of freshwater (ﬁgure 8.4.1a). These latter
variations are largely eliminated by our using salinity-
normalized DIC for our analysis.
If we make the ocean isothermal, i.e., let it have con-
stant temperature, and add biology to it, while still not
permitting air-sea gas exchange to occur, sDIC will begin
to show variations. In a case where we just have organic
matter production by phytoplankton in the upper ocean
followed by export and remineralization of this material
at depth, sDIC would be directly proportional to the
distribution of phosphate, with a slope that is equal to
the C:P stoichiometric ratio of organic matter, r
C:P (ﬁg-
ure 8.4.1d). We can therefore identify the soft-tissue
pump in the absence of gas exchange, DC
soft, by looking
at deviations of phosphate relative to a constant refer-
ence value, [PO
3/C0
4 ]ref , which we set equal to the mean
phosphate concentration in the surface ocean:
DCsoft ¼ rC:P /C1 ([PO3/C0
4 ] /C0 [PO3/C0
4 ]ref )( 8 :4:1)
Similarly, if the formation and dissolution of biogenic
calcium carbonate were the only process affecting DIC
in an isothermal ocean without air-sea gas exchange,
variations of sDIC would be coupled entirely to varia-
tions in sAlk, with a slope of 1:2 (ﬁgure 8.4.1g). We can
thus identify the contribution of the carbonate pump in
the absence of gas exchange, DC
carb, by studying devi-
ations of sAlk relative to a constant background value,
sAlkref, chosen here to be the global mean sAlk in the
surface ocean. In the real ocean, sAlk is also affected by
the soft-tissue pump, and we therefore have to add a
small correction that is proportional to nitrate:
DCcarb ¼ 1
2 (sAlk /C0 sAlk
ref þ [NO/C0
3
] /C0 [NO/C0
3
]ref )( 8 :4:2)
¼ 1
2 (sAlk /C0 sAlk
ref þ rN:P /C1 ([PO3/C0
4 ] /C0 [PO3/C0
4 ]ref ))
(8:4:3)
where we made use of the very tight coupling between
the cycling of nitrate and phosphate (see discussion in
chapter 5) to write our separation in terms of phosphate
only. Therefore, the term r
N:P /C1 ([PO3/C0
4 ] /C0 [PO3/C0
4 ]ref ) ac-
counts for the impact of the soft-tissue pump on Alk.
The sign of this correction term is positive, since the
remineralization of organic matter decreases Alk.
Brewer et al. [1975] introduced the term ‘‘potential al-
kalinity’’ for this nitrate corrected alkalinity, i.e.,
P
Alk ¼ Alk þ NO/C0
3
. Therefore, except for the salinity
normalization, DCcarb is equal to the difference between
observed PAlk and a constant reference Pref
Alk.
Now, let us permit gas exchange with the atmosphere
to occur. In our ﬁrst case of an abiological ocean, the
exchange of CO
2 across the air-sea interface permits the
inorganic CO 2 system in the surface ocean to work to-
ward an equilibrium with atmospheric CO 2. As a result,
waters that cool as they are transported into higher lati-
tudes will tend to take up CO
2 from the atmosphere,
thereby getting enriched in sDIC. Waters that warm up
as they are transported in the opposite direction lose CO2
and consequently have lower sDIC concentrations. As
the high latitudes constitute the source regions for the
deep ocean, a vertical gradient of sDIC will develop (ﬁg-
ure 8.4.1b). The magnitude of this vertical gradient de-
pends on how rapidly air-sea gas exchange can supply the
CO
2 necessary to bring high-latitude surface waters that
sink into the abyss close to saturation (ﬁgure 8.4.1c).
The effect of air-sea gas exchange on the sDIC distri-
bution in an isothermal, biological ocean is opposite to
that in the abiological ocean discussed above (except for
the small carbonate pump effect discussed later; ﬁgure
8.4.1e). Gas exchange will tend to remove carbon from
the high-latitude outcrops of the carbon-rich deep wa-
ters, and add it to the lower-latitude surface waters
[Gruber and Sarmiento, 2002; Toggweiler et al., 2003]. As a
result, the vertical gradient of sDIC produced by biolog-
ical processes will be reduced in the presence of air-sea
exchange. Again, the magnitude of this reduction in the
gradient depends on how fast air-sea exchange is re-
moving CO
2 from the surface relative to the removal by
other processes, such as biological uptake (ﬁgure 8.4.1f ).
Thus, the impact of air-sea exchange on the distri-
bution of sDIC is twofold and includes a thermally
driven as well as a biologically driven component. We
refer to the sum of these two effects as the gas exchange
pump:
DCgas ex ¼ DC bio
gas ex
þ DC therm
gas ex
(8:4:4)
Note that the commonly used term ‘‘solubility pump’’
[Volk and Hoffert , 1985] refers only to the thermal com-
ponent of the gas exchange pump, i.e., DCtherm
gas ex , i.e. those
variations in sDIC that are driven only by temperature
variations and ocean transport and mixing. Unfortu-
nately, the gas exchange pump cannot be estimated di-
rectly from observations. Therefore, we estimate this
pump by subtracting the two biological pumps from the
observations, while taking into account that the invasion
of anthropogenic CO
2 from the atmosphere has already
altered the upper ocean distribution of sDIC. We have
developed the means to estimate this contribution, Cant,
directly from observations [ Gruber et al. , 1996] (see
chapter 10), and subtract it from the observed sDIC dis-
tribution to reconstruct a preindustrial sDIC distribu-
tion. We thus estimate DCgas ex by
DCgas ex ¼ sDIC /C0 sDICref /C0 Cant /C0 DCsoft /C0 DCcarb (8:4:5)
where DICref is a constant reference concentration
chosen here as the mean surface ocean sDIC in pre-
industrial times. Note that this reference concentration
and those used in the deﬁnitions of DC
soft and DCcarb
343
Carbon Cycle