were only added for the convenience of setting the global
mean surface concentration of each of the three pump
components to zero. This is an arbitrary choice and has
no inﬂuence on the interpretation, since the information
of interest is contained in the gradients of these pump
components from one place to another.
It needs to be emphasized that DC
soft and DCcarb refer
only to the impact of ocean biology on sDIC in the
absence of air-sea gas exchange. Therefore, these two
components can be viewed as ‘‘potential’’ pumps. They
differ from the common deﬁnition of these biological
pumps, as the latter include also the impact of biology
on the air-sea gas exchange component, i.e., DC
bio
gas ex
[Volk and Hoffert , 1985; Toggweiler et al. , 2003a, b]. If we
were able to estimate DCbio
gas ex , we could add it to DCsoft
and DCcarb and determine the complete contribution of
these two processes. However, this is unfortunately not
possible on the basis of observations. Below, we will use
model results to undertake this split of DC
gas ex
and discuss the implications. Another argument in
favor of the pump separation adopted here is that it
clearly separates the inﬂuence of air-sea gas exchange
from the inﬂuence of processes that only redistrib-
ute sDIC internally within the ocean. This can be thought
of as separating the closed system response (no exchange
with the atmosphere) from the open system response
(including exchange with the atmosphere) to processes
that lead to perturbation in the oceanic carbon cycle.
We will now discuss the contribution of each of these
pumps to the observed distribution of sDIC in turn,
beginning with the soft-tissue pump. The major focus
of the discussion will be on the contribution of the gas
exchange pump to the sDIC distribution, which holds
interesting surprises.
The Biological Pumps
Figure 8.4.2 reveals that the soft-tissue pump in the
absence of air-sea exchange, DC
soft, is responsible for
about 215 mmol kg/C0 1 (70%) of the surface-to-deep gra-
dient of preindustrial sDIC of about 305 mmol kg/C0 1. The
carbonate pump, DCcarb, accounts for approximately
60 mmol kg/C0 1 (20%) of the observed gradient, and the
gas exchange pump, DCgas ex , for the remainder.
The dominance of the soft-tissue pump in creating the
vertical gradient in preindustrial sDIC is not surprising,
since we have seen this dominance already expressed in
the strong covariation between sDIC and phosphate
(ﬁgure 8.1.4a). The substantially smaller contribution of
the carbonate pump will be conﬁrmed in chapter 9,
where we will show that the downward transport of
carbon as CaCO
3 is about 10 times smaller than the
downward transport of organic matter [ Sarmiento et al .,
2002]. Figures 8.4.3a and b show the contribution of the
biological pumps in the different ocean basins. Again,
the soft-tissue and carbonate pump contributions exhibit
the expected pattern of increasing contributions of these
pumps in the deep waters along the ﬂow path of the
lower limb of the global-scale overturning circulation
(ﬁgure 2.4.11).
A more detailed inspection of ﬁgure 8.4.3 reveals that
the two biological pumps have quite different vertical
structures. Almost the entire surface-to-deep gradient
in the soft-tissue component, DC
soft, occurs in the main
thermocline, with little additional contribution below
1000 m. By contrast, the contribution of the carbonate
pump component, DC
carb, to the variability of prein-
dustrial sDIC in the main thermocline is relatively
small (<40mmol kg/C0 1). However, DCcarb increases slowly
with depth below 1000 m and reaches a maximum at
depths between 2000 to 6000 m. This is signiﬁcantly
deeper than the maximum of DC
soft, which occurs at
about 1000 m.
The difference between DCsoft and DCcarb is particu-
larly striking in the Atlantic basin, where DCcarb grad-
ually increases all the way to the bottom, whereas DCsoft
shows a pronounced maximum in intermediate waters
at around 1000 m. The maximum in DC
carb shoals from
the Atlantic to the Indian and Paciﬁc Oceans but still
occurs signiﬁcantly deeper than the maximum in
DC
soft. This indicates that the formation and dissolution
of calcium carbonate is a process independent from the
formation and remineralization of organic matter. We
will discuss the cycling of calcium carbonate in more
detail in the following chapter, but we can point out
here already that the spatial distribution of DC
carb is
 -100 0 100 200 300 400
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
depth (m)
∆Csoft
 
∆sDIC (µmol kg-1)
∆Cgas-ex
∆Ccarb
Figure 8.4.2: Global mean proﬁles of the three main carbon
pumps. The data are plotted cumulatively. Based on
GLODAP data [ Key et al ., 1994].
345
Carbon Cycle