consistent with the variation of the saturation horizons
for the two major phases of calcium carbonate, calcite
and aragonite. The saturation horizon for aragonite, the
more soluble phase, occurs in the Atlantic at depths of
about 3000 m, whereas it lies within the main ther-
mocline in the Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean [ Takahashi
et al ., 1981, Broecker and Peng , 1982, Feely et al ., 2002,
Chung et al ., 2003].
The Gas Exchange Pump
Let us turn now to the gas exchange pump. Figure 8.4.2
reveals that the contribution of the gas exchange pump to
the global mean vertical proﬁle of preindustrial sDIC
amounts to only about 30 mmol kg
/C0 1 (10%). How does
this compare to what one would expect on the basis of the
surface-to-deep temperature gradient? We can estimate
this temperature-induced gradient by combining the
temperature sensitivity of pCO
2 (8.3.4) with the deﬁni-
tion of the buffer factor (8.3.14) (see equation (10.2.31)).
This gives, on average, a temperature sensitivity of DIC
of about 8 to 9 mmol kg
/C0 1 per degree of temperature
change (see slope in ﬁgure 8.1.4b). Therefore, with a
surface-to-deep temperature gradient of about 18
/C14 C, one
would expect a temperature-induced surface-to-deep
gradient in sDIC of about 140 to 160 mmol kg
/C0 1. This is
several times larger than our estimate on the basis of
DC
gas ex. Such a small imprint of air-sea gas exchange on
the distribution of sDIC is particularly surprising given
the strong correlation of sDIC with temperature (ﬁgure
8.1.4b). Why is this case? Is this small DCgas ex signal a
result of the biological contribution, DCbio
gas ex
, offsetting
the thermal component, DCtherm
gas ex
, or is it because of ki-
netic limitations, i.e., the slow exchange of CO 2 not
permitting the full temperature variations in the ocean to
be reﬂected in sDIC?
Consideration of DC
gas ex in the different ocean ba-
sins reveals additional puzzles (ﬁgure 8.4.3c). Hidden
in the small global mean surface-to-deep difference of
DC
gas ex , we ﬁnd a very large imprint of the gas ex-
change pump in the deep Atlantic. This indicates that
these waters must have taken up a substantial amount
of CO
2 from the atmosphere before they descended into
the deep Atlantic. The deep Paciﬁc and deep Indian
have smaller and vertically more uniform values of
DC
gas ex . Figure 8.4.3c also shows that Antarctic Inter-
mediate Water (AAIW), which dominates the deeper
thermocline in the southern hemisphere (see salinity
minimum in ﬁgure 2.4.1), has comparatively low
concentrations of DC
gas ex , suggesting that the source
waters for AAIW have lost CO 2 to the atmosphere be-
fore they descended into the ocean’s interior. What are
the reasons for these spatial variations in DC
gas ex , and
why does the deep Atlantic have such high concentra-
tions of DC
gas ex in comparison to the deep Indian and
Paciﬁc?
The latter question is linked to an important research
topic in global carbon cycle research. Since deep waters
in the Atlantic ﬂow southward, these high concentra-
tions of DC
gas ex provide a conduit for transporting CO 2
taken up by the ocean in the northern hemisphere
into the southern hemisphere, where it is released back
into the atmosphere. In a preindustrial steady-state, such
an oceanic southward transport of CO
2 must have been
compensated by a northward transport of CO 2 in the
atmosphere. This requires the existence in preindustrial
times of a south-to-north concentration gradient in at-
mospheric CO
2. Accurate knowledge of such a prein-
dustrial interhemispheric gradient in atmospheric CO 2
is of prime importance for atmospheric inverse studies
that attempt to determine the present sources and sinks
of anthropogenic CO
2 in the global carbon cycle [ Keeling
et al., 1989; Tans et al ., 1990; Ciais et al ., 1995; Fan et al .,
1998; Gurney et al ., 2002; Gloor et al ., 2003]. This is be-
cause one requires accurate estimates of all natural
processes causing atmospheric CO
2 variations, before
the inversions can determine where anthropogenic CO 2
is taken up currently at the surface of the Earth.
We continue our discussion of the DCgas ex distribu-
tion by addressing next the puzzle of the small global
mean contribution of the gas exchange pump, and
consider the Atlantic gas exchange signal afterwards. As
we will see, however, the underlying cause for these two
patterns is the same. It is the interaction of air-sea ﬂuxes
of heat with ocean biology and large-scale ocean circu-
lation that determines how strongly the gas exchange
pump inﬂuences the oceanic sDIC concentrations.
Global Mean
The ﬁrst key to understanding variations in DC
gas ex is to
recall that both heat ﬂuxes and biological processes
control the exchange of CO
2 across the air-sea interface
(see (8.4.4)). The second key is that the exchange of CO 2
across the air-sea interface is slow relative to the resi-
dence time of waters near the surface. This prevents full
expression of the impact of both heat ﬂuxes and biolog-
ical changes on the respective gas exchange ﬂuxes.
It is therefore instructive to separate the gas ex-
change pump even further into potential components
(DC
bio, pot
gas ex , DCtherm, pot
gas ex ) that would reﬂect the DCgas ex
distribution if gas exchange were inﬁnitely rapid, and
into kinetic components ( DC
bio, kin
gas ex , DCtherm, kin
gas ex )t h a t
describe the changes from an inﬁnitely rapid exchange
to a case with realistic air-sea gas exchange:
DCbio
gas ex ¼ DCbio, pot
gas ex þ DCbio, kin
gas ex (8:4:6)
DCtherm
gas ex ¼ DCtherm, pot
gas ex þ DCtherm, kin
gas ex (8:4:7)
The role of each of these four gas exchange compo-
nents can be understood better by returning to the
thought experiments we introduced at the beginning of
347
Carbon Cycle