this section to separate DCsoft, DCcarb, and DCgas ex (see
ﬁgure 8.4.1). At the same time, we will attempt to esti-
mate the magnitude of each of these components, using
a combination of observations and model results.
We start again with an ocean with a realistic tem-
perature distribution, but without biology. We have seen
that without air-sea gas exchange, this ocean would have
a uniform sDIC distribution. We then turn on inﬁnitely
rapid air-sea exchange and let the ocean fully equilibrate
with a ﬁxed atmospheric pCO
2 of 280 matm (ﬁgure
8.4.1b). The difference between this case and the no-
gas-exchange case is the contribution of the potential
DC
therm
gas ex pump (also called ‘‘potential solubility pump’’
[Murnane et al., 1999]). The potential DCtherm
gas ex component
can be estimated directly from data by computing the
sDIC concentration in equilibrium with a preindustrial
atmospheric pCO
2 of 280 matm and assuming constant
salinity-normalized total alkalinity. The resulting mean
global surface-to-deep gradient of DC
therm, pot
gas ex amounts to
about 155 mmol kg/C0 1 (ﬁgure 8.4.4).
What happens if we then scale down air-sea gas ex-
change to realistic values? As it takes about 6 months to
equilibrate DIC in a 40 m-deep surface layer with the
atmosphere (see discussion in section 8.3 above), and
typical residence times of surface waters are between a
few days to a few years, the CO
2 system in surface
waters generally does not achieve equilibration with the
atmosphere. Therefore, the potential thermal gas ex-
change pump cannot be achieved fully (ﬁgure 8.4.1),
resulting in a reduced vertical sDIC gradient (ﬁgure
8.4.4), with the difference being the kinetic DC
therm
gas ex ef-
fect. Unfortunately, we cannot estimate the kinetic
DC
therm
gas ex component directly from observations, but
simulations by Murnane et al . [1999] indicate that the
slow kinetics of CO 2 exchange reduces DCtherm
gas ex by
90 mmol kg/C0 1 (see ﬁgure 8.4.4), suggesting that the slow
kinetics of air-sea gas exchange plays an important role.
Toggweiler et al . [2003] pointed out, however, that this
particular model may tend to overestimate the kinetic
effect and that the true thermal DC
gas ex gradient might
be somewhat closer to the potential thermal DCgas ex
gradient, DCtherm, pot
gas ex .
We use our second and third thought experiments
with an isothermal ocean and fully operational soft-
tissue and carbonate pumps to elucidate the inﬂuence
of biology on air-sea gas exchange (ﬁgure 8.4.1). We
have seen above that, in the absence of air-sea gas ex-
change, the interior ocean distribution of sDIC would
be directly proportional to either phosphate (soft-tissue
pump) or potential alkalinity (carbonate pump). If we
turn on inﬁnitely rapid air-sea gas exchange, surface wa-
ters will become fully equilibrated with a ﬁxed atmo-
sphere of 280 matm.
In the case of the soft-tissue pump, gas exchange in
the high latitudes, where the elevated sDIC waters of
the deep ocean come to the surface, would cause a loss
of CO
2 to the atmosphere, depleting the waters in sDIC
relative to a case without gas exchange. Conversely, gas
exchange in the low latitudes would lead to an uptake of
CO
2 from the atmosphere, as the biological ﬁxation of
CO2 creates a deﬁcit of CO 2 relative to the atmosphere.
Both changes lead to a reduction of the surface-to-deep
gradient. We can estimate the resulting surface-to-deep
gradient in sDIC from O
2, as the cycling of CO 2 in the
rapid gas exchange case would follow very closely that of
O
2, except for a small deviation caused by surface varia-
tions in sAlk. The reason this works is because the surface
concentration of O2 is generally very close to saturation,
as expected in a case of inﬁnitely rapid air-sea gas ex-
change. In particular, in an isothermal ocean with biol-
ogy and inﬁnitely fast gas exchange, the interior distri-
bution of sDIC would be directly proportional to the
apparent oxygen utilization (AOU), with the proportion-
ality given by the C:O
2 ratio of organic matter reminer-
alization. Thus, multiplying the mean global surface-to-
deep AOU gradient with r
C:O2 ¼ 117 : /C0 170 [Anderson and
Sarmiento, 1994], and subtracting the result from DCsoft,
i.e., the sDIC distribution that would exist in the absence
of gas exchange, we arrive at a soft-tissue pump contri-
bution to DC
bio, pot
gas ex of about /C0 145 mmol kg/C0 1.
In the case of the carbonate pump, turning on inﬁ-
nitely fast gas exchange would lead to an effect opposite
to that in the case of the soft-tissue pump. As the high
latitudes in such an ocean would have very high con-
centrations of sAlk relative to sDIC due to the presence
of a dissolution signal from the deep ocean, these wa-
ters would tend to take up CO
2 from the atmosphere.
The low latitudes, in turn, would tend to lose CO 2 as
the excess of CaCO 3 formation over dissolution drives
oceanic pCO2 above that of the atmosphere (see ﬁg-
ure 8.3.5). Therefore, the presence of air-sea gas ex-
change enhances the surface-to-deep sDIC gradient in a
case where the formation and dissolution of CaCO
3 is
the only biological process. This enhancement can be
approximated by calculating the difference between
the sDIC concentration in equilibrium with the atmo-
sphere for a constant salinity-normalized alkalinity and
the sDIC equilibrium concentration for the observed
preformed alkalinity (taken from Gruber et al . [1996]).
As it turns out, this enhancement, i.e., the carbonate
pump contribution to potential DC
bio
gas ex , is almost an
order of magnitude smaller than that of the soft-tissue
pump, amounting to only about 15 mmol kg
/C0 1. Adding
the potential carbonate and soft-tissue pump compo-
nents together, we arrive at a total contribution of
DC
bio, pot
gas ex of /C0 130 mmol kg /C0 1 (ﬁgure 8.4.4).
When we use a realistic air-sea gas exchange instead,
the gas exchange–induced reduction of the imprint of
the biological pumps is smaller (ﬁgure 8.4.4). This
leads to a vertical sDIC gradient from the biological
pumps and the DC
bio
gas ex pump that is somewhere be-
tween the fully expressed biological pumps (ﬁgure
348
Chapter 8