8.4.1d) and the potential DCbio
gas ex case (ﬁgure 8.4.1e).
This means that the kinetic DCbio
gas ex is positive, i.e., it
increases the surface-to-deep gradient in sDIC (ﬁgure
8.4.4). As was the case for the kinetic DCtherm
gas ex contri-
bution, it is currently not possible to estimate the ki-
netic DC
bio
gas ex contribution directly from data. However,
if we adopt the estimated DCtherm
gas ex of Murnane et al .
[1999], the kinetic effect on the biological component of
DC
gas ex is substantial and amounts to around 60 mmol
kg/C0 1. This results in a DCbio
gas ex component of only about
/C0 70 mmol kg /C0 1 (ﬁgure 8.4.4).
While the exact values of the kinetic components are
not known, the overall conclusion is very clear. The
small imprint of air-sea gas exchange on the vertical
sDIC distribution (DC
gas ex) is a consequence of generally
opposing tendencies of DCbio
gas ex and DCtherm
gas ex . The mag-
nitude of these two components depends on the mag-
nitude of biological ﬂuxes and heat ﬂuxes that create
‘‘potential’’ gas exchange ﬂuxes, and the kinetics of air-
sea exchange that determines to what degree these two
potential pumps are realized. If the simulations by
Murnane et al . [1999] are approximately correct, it ap-
pears that in the present ocean, a relatively small fraction
of the potential gas exchange pumps are expressed.
This hypothesis was recently investigated in greater
detail and conﬁrmed by Toggweiler et al . [2003a, b]. They
also highlighted that this kinetic limitation and how it
is represented in different ocean models determines to
a substantial degree how strongly atmospheric CO
2 re-
sponds to changes in upper ocean biology and chemis-
try, particularly when these changes occur in the high
latitudes. We will come back to this topic in chapter 10,
as it has strong implications on how we can explain the
large atmospheric CO
2 variations associated with glacial-
interglacial cycles in climate.
Atlantic versus Paciﬁc
The high DC
gas ex concentrations of the deep Atlantic in
contrast to the low concentrations in the Paciﬁc can be
understood following arguments similar to those used
to understand the global mean distribution of DC
gas ex .
However, it is this time more instructive to trace the
potential biological effect potential thermal effect
-200 -100 0 100
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
depth (m)
∆Cgas ex ∆Cgas ex
therm,pot
∆Cgas ex
therm
∆Cgas ex
bio,pot ∆Cgas ex
bio
kinetic 
effect
∆Cgas ex (µmol kg-1)
kinetic 
effect
-50-150 50 150
Figure 8.4.4: Global mean proﬁles of the two biological and the two thermal gas exchange pump
components. The potential DCtherm
gas ex was calculated assuming that surface sDIC is in equilibrium with the
atmosphere using a constant salinity-normalized total alkalinity. The potential DCbio
gas ex was computed from
AOU taking into account a change in the surface Alk concentration due to biology on the basis of
preformed surface alkalinity estimates [ Gruber et al ., 1996]. The kinetic DCtherm
gas ex proﬁle is taken from the
model of Murnane et al . [1999], and the kinetic DCbio
gas ex component was calculated by difference.
349
Carbon Cycle