Atlantic is because the nutrient content of the ther-
mocline is relatively low as a result of the nutrient ex-
port by NADW.
An additional factor contributing to the low DC
soft
and DCcarb signals in the North Atlantic in comparison
with the Southern Ocean may be the large difference in
the bio-availability of iron. In the Southern Ocean, ob-
servational evidence is steadily increasing that the low
availability of iron as a result of low atmospheric de-
position is preventing the complete drawdown of nu-
trients, thus creating the largest high-nutrient, low-
chlorophyll (HNLC) region [ Martin et al ., 1990b, 1991;
de Baar et al ., 1995; Boyd et al ., 2000] (see detailed dis-
cussion in chapter 4). The atmospheric delivery of iron
to the North Atlantic is almost an order of magnitude
higher [ Duce et al ., 1991, Tegen and Fung , 1994] and
appears to be sufﬁcient to allow the near-complete
drawdown of nutrients, creating low DC
soft and DCcarb
concentration. This example illustrates how the inter-
action of biological processes with large-scale ocean
circulation and possibly the biogeochemical cycles of
iron can lead to quite unexpected results.
8.5 Carbon Pumps and Surface Fluxes
In this last section, we would like to close the great
biogeochemical loop, and investigate the connection
between the ocean carbon pumps and air-sea ﬂuxes of
CO
2. In particular, we will look at the biological and
thermal components of the gas exchange pump, in order
to understand what drives the CO
2 ﬂuxes across the air-
sea interface. Unfortunately, it is not possible to split the
observed air-sea ﬂux of CO
2 into these two components.
We therefore use model results as an illustration.
Following Murnane et al . [1999], we ran two parallel
simulations in an ocean biogeochemistry model, one
with the thermal gas exchange pump only, and a sec-
ond one that includes both biological pumps. The latter
simulation is termed ‘‘combined pump.’’ The dif-
ference in air-sea CO
2 ﬂuxes between these two simu-
lations is taken as the contribution of the biological gas
exchange pump. The model employed here is very
similar to that described in detail in chapter 5 except
that a representation of the carbonate pump has
been included as well. In order to arrive at a realistic
atmosphere-ocean distribution of CO
2, all simulations
were run to a quasi steady-state by setting atmospheric
CO
2 to its pre-industrial value of 280 ppm and letting
the ocean adjust to this concentration (see Najjar and
Orr [1998] for details). This takes several thousand years
of spin-up.
Figure 8.5.1a shows the meridional pattern of the zon-
ally integrated air-sea gas exchange as predicted by this
model. The patterns exhibited by the thermal gas ex-
change pump are related to the transport of heat and water
within the ocean and its exchange with the atmosphere. In
the high latitudes, surface waters lose heat to the atmo-
sphere and consequently take up CO
2 from the atmo-
sphere. In the equatorial regi ons, colder waters that are
upwelled to the surface are warmed up, which leads to a
loss of CO
2 to the atmosphere. The correlation of the air-
sea exchange ﬂuxes of CO 2 with the heat ﬂuxes are
modiﬁed, however, by the slow air-sea exchange of CO 2
relative to heat. This shows up particularly in the equato-
rial region, where the peak of the CO
2 gas exchange is
much wider than would be predicted by the heat exchange
alone.
The biological pump represents, to a ﬁrst approxima-
tion, a closed loop within the ocean. Waters that are
brought to the surface contain an excess of inorganic
carbon stemming from the biological pump relative to
these surface waters. At the same time, these waters also
contain an excess of nutrients. Biological uptake at the
surface is generally fast enough to strip out all or most of
the nutrients and the excess CO
2 before CO2 is lost to the
atmosphere. Only in regions where the biological uptake
is inefﬁcient in reducing the nutrients and the associated
biological inorganic carbon coming to the surface will
CO
2 escape into the atmosphere. As we discussed in
detail in chapter 4, a good diagnostic of such regions of
low efﬁciency is high surface-nutrient concentrations,
which occur in the Southern Ocean, in the equatorial
Paciﬁc, and in the North Paciﬁc. The Southern Ocean,
characterized by the highest surface ocean-nutrient
concentration, also represents the region with the high-
est loss of CO
2 to the atmosphere associated with the
biological pump. This biologically induced outgassing
outweighs the uptake of CO
2 from the atmosphere as a
consequence of the thermal gas exchange pump, leading
to a small residual outgassing in the combined pump
scenario in this region (ﬁgure 8.5.1a). This is exactly the
same compensation that we alluded to before when try-
ing to explain the low vertical DC
gas ex signal in the ob-
servations. The loss of CO 2 in the high latitudes due to
the biological pump is compensated by a net uptake of
CO
2 in the mid-latitudes, so that the global net exchange
of CO2 in association with the biological pump is zero as
required. Simulations of the contribution of the car-
bonate pump to the variation in the biological pump
show it to be generally small [ Murnane et al. , 1999].
The pattern of the zonally integrated air-sea exchange
due to the combined pumps represents the sum of the
patterns generated by the thermal and biological pumps.
In this particular model, the thermally forced CO
2 ﬂuxes
tend to dominate, except in the Southern Ocean. The air-
352
Chapter 8