phosphate, and 16:1 for nitrate to phosphate. Compute the pCO2 of this water
sample after
a. it has been brought to the surface,
b. it is warmed to T ¼ 26
/C14 C,
c. all phosphate is removed by net formation of organic matter, and
d. its Alk is adjusted to 2310 mmol kg
/C0 1 by the formation of CaCO 3 (re-
member to remove DIC also).
Hint: Use the lookup table to compute the oceanicpCO2 for a given DIC and Alk
rather than employing approximation (8.3.3). However, it is safe to use approxi-
mation (8.3.4) for making the temperature correction.
8.15 Figures 8.3.12 and 8.3.13 show the seasonal cycles of pCO
2 for the Atlantic
and Paciﬁc Oceans, respectively. Compare these two seasonal cycles and
relate the differences to what you have learned about the seasonal dynamics
of surface production in these two areas.
8.16 The seasonal cycle of pCO
2 in the subtropical gyres appears to be determined
primarily by the seasonal variation of sea-surface temperature, with a partially
compensating effect due to variations in DIC (see ﬁgure 8.3.10). Discuss how
sea-surface pCO
2 in these regions would change in response to a positive SST
anomaly of 1 /C14 C and a negative DIC anomaly of 1 mmol m /C0 3. (Hint: Use the
temperature and DIC sensitivities of pCO2 given by (8.3.4) and (8.3.14) to
compute the change in pCO2. Also use the mean concentrations of DIC and
Alk for the low-latitude ocean given in table 8.2.4.)
8.17 Describe the main features of the DpCO2 distribution shown in ﬁgure 8.1.1.
Explain and discuss the reasons for this distribution. In particular, why are
the tropical regions supersaturated and the high latitudes undersaturated
with respect to atmospheric CO
2?
8.18 Discuss how ocean biology impacts the air-sea exchange of CO 2. In particular,
address whether the strength or the efﬁciency of the biological pump is more
relevant for controlling the air-sea ﬂux of CO
2. Explain the basis for your choice.
8.19 Figure 8.1.3 shows the sDIC distribution along the meridional overturning
circulation.
a. Describe the main features of this distribution.
b. Often, the term ‘‘pumps’’ is used to describe processes that affect the
distribution of sDIC. Name the three major pumps and describe brieﬂy
how they work.
c. Relate the observations that you described in (a) to the action of the
three pumps.
8.20 Speculate about the effects of an increase in the efﬁciency of nutrient utili-
zation in the Southern Ocean on the vertical distribution of the gas exchange
component DC
gas ex .
8.21 During the Younger Dryas, a period of abrupt cooling in the northern
hemisphere about 11 kyr ago, deep water formation in the North Atlantic
reduced dramatically. Discuss what impact this might have had on DIC and
the different pump components in the deep Atlantic.
358
Chapter 8