Chapter 9
Calcium Carbonate Cycle
9.1 Introduction
Mineral calcium carbonates (CaCO 3), which occur in
the ocean mainly in the form of calcite, represent a
signiﬁcant fraction of deep ocean sediments, and be-
long to the most common minerals on Earth’s surface.
Most mineral CaCO
3 that is found at the bottom of the
ocean is actually formed by organisms living in near-
surface waters. The contribution of abiotic precipita-
tion in today’s ocean is virtually zero, despite the fact
that near-surface waters are supersaturated with re-
spect to mineral CaCO
3. The high relative contribution
of CaCO 3 to open ocean sediments is a direct conse-
quence of the observed fact that about half of the
CaCO
3 that leaves the surface ocean arrives at the
sediments, and that about a third of this CaCO 3 is
buried, i.e., about 13% of the surface export of CaCO 3 is
lost from the ocean every year (ﬁgure 9.1.1). It is very
instructive to contrast this high burial efﬁciency with
the open ocean budget of organic matter (see table
6.5.1), where 95% of the organic matter exported from
the surface ocean is remineralized within the water
column, and where only about 0.3% of surface organic
matter export is buried.
The high burial of CaCO
3 leads to a signiﬁcant loss
of Alk from the ocean, which is replaced by riverine
input of Alk stemming from continental weathering,
and a small input from hydrothermal vents (see ﬁgure
9.1.1). The magnitude of these ﬂuxes is two orders of
magnitude smaller than the exchange of carbon be-
tween the atmosphere and ocean, and result in a resi-
dence time of Alk in the ocean of about 10
5 years
[Sundquist, 1991]. These small ﬂuxes and the overall
small contribution of the carbonate pump to the dis-
tribution of DIC (see discussion in chapter 8) might
lead to the conclusion that the oceanic cycling of min-
eral CaCO
3 is a relatively unimportant component of
the ocean carbon cycle.
On timescales longer than a few hundred years,
however, the cycling of CaCO 3 in the ocean emerges as
a crucial component of the global carbon cycle. This is
because the vast pool of CaCO
3 in the surface sedi-
ments becomes an active pool of the ocean carbon cycle
on these timescales. It is conceivable that imbalances
between the river input of Alk and the loss by burial
might develop on such long timescales, as these two
processes appear to be independent. Changes in mean
ocean alkalinity resulting from the interaction with the
ocean sediments and from an imbalance between river
input and ocean burial could be quite substantial,
possibly resulting in large changes in atmospheric CO
2.
If such large changes in atmospheric CO 2 had ever
occured, they would have threatened life on Earth either
by overheating or by CO
2 starvation of terrestrial plants.
It turns out, however, that the interaction of the oceanic
carbon cycle with the underlying sediments leads to a
negative, i.e., stabilizing, feedback, which forces the
system toward a balance between the input of Alk by
weathering and the loss by burial. This feedback in-
volves a change in the mean ocean DIC-to-Alk ratio
such that the magnitude of CaCO
3 burial on the sea-
ﬂoor is adjusted until any imbalance with the weath-
ering input is removed, a process termed calcium car-
bonate compensation [Broecker and Peng , 1987]. Thus the
ocean CaCO
3 system acts as a ‘‘homeostat’’ which on
millennial timescales and longer maintains a steady
state by linking deep sea burial rate to the balance of
continental weathering minus shallow water deposition
[Broecker and Takahashi , 1977a; Archer, 1996a].
On timescales of hundreds of thousands of years, a
second feedback mechanism stabilizing atmospheric
CO
2 has been proposed. It links volcanic outgassing of
CO2 and continental weathering of igneous rocks which
consumes CO 2 (see reaction 10.2.12) and whose rates
tend to depend on Earth’s temperature [ Walker et al .,
1981; Berner et al., 1983; Broecker and Sanyal, 1998]. This
feedback is thought to be provided through the police
action of atmospheric CO
2. The hypothesis is that if the
359