organic matter (ﬁgure 6.1.4). Comparing this map with a
bathymetric map reveals that the regions with high CaCO
3
content occur mostly on the oceanic ridges, whereas the
deep ocean basins are almost completely devoid of CaCO
3.
(Broecker and Peng [1982] compared this distribution to
snowcapped mountains). What controls this burial pat-
tern? Is it dissolution kinetics as is the case for opal, or is the
burial pattern determined by the degree of saturation?
Figure 9.1.2 suggests that it is the latter, as we ﬁnd accu-
mulation of CaCO
3 in shallow sediments, where the ocean
is supersaturated with respect to calcite, the more stable
form of CaCO
3, and no CaCO3 in deep ocean sediments
where the ocean is undersaturated.
Understanding the processes that lead to this pres-
ervation pattern are of great importance because vari-
ations in the CaCO
3 content of deep-sea sediments con-
stitute one of the principal indicators of past changes in
the global carbon cycle. Coupled with isotopic and
chemical analyses, variations in the CaCO
3 content of
the sediments provide important clues for assessing
how marine systems responded to changing climate
conditions in the past. In order to fully exploit the in-
formation stored in the sediments, it is imperative to
develop a fundamental understanding of the processes
that link production of CaCO
3 in the surface oceans
with the resulting sedimentary record.
9.2 Production
In the open ocean, mineral calcium carbonates are
formed almost exclusively by biological processes. The
lack of inorganic precipitation of CaCO
3,d e s p i t et h ef a c t
that these waters are supersaturated with respect to these
minerals, is generally thought to be due to nucleation
barriers; the necessary seed crystals may be absent, or
magnesium ions, phosphate, or organic compounds may
act as surface inhibitors for nucleation [Stumm and Mor-
gan, 1981, p. 316]. Interestingly, the situation in lakes is
reversed; almost all carbonates are formed as inorganic
precipitates, and very little by organisms [Kelts and Hsu€,
1978].
Organisms
Three groups of marine organisms are mainly respon-
sible for the precipitation of CaCO
3 in the open ocean
(see also chapter 4, panels 4.2.2 and 4.2.3). Coccolitho-
phorids (see panel 4.2.2, ﬁgure 2) are a phytoplankton
group that form an outer sphere of small calcite plates.
The other two groups forming CaCO
3 shells are het-
erotrophic zooplankton. Foraminifera are amoebas that
form beautiful skeletons made out of calcite (panel 4.2.3,
ﬁgure 1). Finally, pteropods are a group of mollusks that
produce crystals made out of aragonite rather than cal-
cite. Between these two phases of mineral CaCO
3, calcite
is the more stable phase at any pressure and tempera-
ture found in the oceans. Since surface waters are su-
persaturated with respect to both mineral phases, evo-
lutionary history is likely the key determinant for which
mineral phase organisms precipitate.
There are many reasons marine organisms may
precipitate CaCO
3 shells. In the case of foraminifera,
the reason is most likely protection from predation. The
foraminifera shells consist actually of a series of hollow
chambers, which are produced sequentially as the or-
ganism grows. When foraminifera reproduce, either
sexually or asexually, they start again from a new initial
chamber, although the chamber is much larger in the
case of an asexually produced generation, in compari-
son to a sexually produced generation.
In the case of coccolithophorids, it has been hy-
pothesized early on ( Paasche [1962]; Sikes et al . [1980])
that calciﬁcation could be linked to photosynthesis, as
the formation of CaCO
3 from HCO/C0
3
produces aqueous
CO2, which can then be used as a source of inorganic
carbon during photosynthesis:
2HCO/C0
3
þCa2þ ÐCO2 þCaCO3 þH2O( 9 :2:1)
This would provide an advantage for coccolithophorids,
as this strategy circumvents the need for CO
2 concen-
tration mechanisms, which are employed by other
phytoplankton groups to increase the intracellular con-
centration of aqueous CO
2, thereby increasing the efﬁ-
ciency of photosynthesis. However, the magnitude of the
coupling between photosynthesis and CaCO
3 formation
is still a topic of intense debate, with some experiments
suggesting that a very large fraction of the aqueous CO
2
ﬁxed during photosynthesis stems from calciﬁcation
[e.g., Buitenhuis et al., 1999] while other studies indicate a
much smaller fraction (see recent review by Paasche
[2002]). One reason against the CO
2 supply argument is
that photosynthesis and calciﬁcation occur in very dif-
ferent locations within the cells of coccolithophorids.
Photosynthesis occurs in the plastids, whereas the
CaCO
3 platelets (called liths) are formed in special coc-
colith vesicles, both of which are separated by mem-
branes from the rest of the cell. Once formed, the liths
are then transported to the outside of the cell, where they
stay within a coccosphere until they are shed individually
after the death of the cell or sometimes earlier. It appears
that the source of inorganic carbon for photosynthesis
and CaCO
3 precipitation is only partially the intercellular
medium, and that inorganic carbon can also be taken
up directly from seawater. In all cases, the source of
CaCO
3 is HCO /C0
3
, whereas photosynthesis is fueled by
aqueous CO2.
362
Chapter 9