Although the strength of the coupling between pho-
tosynthesis and calciﬁcation remains unclear, experi-
mental results in the laboratory show a very clear de-
pendence of calciﬁcation rates by coccolithophorids on
the availability of aqueous CO
2 [Riebesell et al., 2000], with
calciﬁcation rates plummeting as the aqueous CO 2
concentration increases. This strong calciﬁcation re-
sponse has important implications for the future. The
progressive increase in atmospheric CO
2 has already
increased the surface ocean CO 2 concentration sub-
stantially (and correspondingly decreased the CO 2/C0
3
concentration) and this increase will likely continue into
the foreseeable future (see chapter 10). It therefore has
been suggested that marine rates of calciﬁcation might
strongly decrease in the future [ Riebesell et al ., 2000],
leading to a negative feedback for atmospheric CO
2
[Zondervan et al ., 2001]. This negative feedback arises
because a decreasing rate of formation of CaCO 3 would
tend to lower oceanic pCO2 (see discussion in section 8.3
above), thereby increasing the uptake of CO 2 from the
atmosphere and enhancing the oceanic mitigation of the
anthropogenic perturbation of the global carbon cycle
[Sarmiento and Gruber , 2002].
It is interesting to point out that most of the organisms
that precipitate CaCO
3 in today’s open ocean are rela-
tively young from an evolutionary perspective. The fossil
record suggests that coccolithophorids emerged in the
mid-Triassic, i.e., around 200 million years ago [ Bown
et al., 2004] and rose to prominence after the Cenomanian/
Turonian boundary, about 90 million years before present
[Iglesias-Rodrı´guez et al., 2002b]. Similarly, planktonic fora-
minifera do not appear in the fossil record until the mid-
Jurassic, i.e., about 180 million years ago. Before that time,
there were essentially no open ocean planktonic organisms
that precipitated CaCO
3. Only shallow water and benthic
organisms formed biogenic CaCO3.
Export Estimates
Global estimates of current open ocean CaCO 3 pro-
duction and export are of the order of 1 Pg C yr /C0 1 (see
summary by Iglesias-Rodrı´guez et al . [2002a]). From an
inventory of alkalinity and the residence time of various
water masses, Milliman and Droxler [1996] estimated a
global open ocean export of mineral carbonates of about
0.7 Pg C yr
/C0 1. Lee [2001], looking at the seasonal draw-
down of potential alkalinity, found a lower-bound esti-
mate for CaCO
3 export of about 1.1 Pg C yr /C0 1. Most of
the open ocean CaCO 3 export is believed to be in the
form of calcite, driven primarily by coccolithophorids,
although some recent studies in the Arabian Sea and
equatorial Paciﬁc suggest a substantial contribution
from foraminifera [ Iglesias-Rodrı´guez et al ., 2002a]. In
contrast, aragonitic pteropods seem to account for only
about 10% of the total open ocean carbonate export
[Berner and Honjo , 1981; Fabry, 1990].
Comparing these CaCO
3 export estimates with our
estimate of organic matter export of about 12 Pg C yr /C0 1
(see chapters 4 and 5) reveals an inorganic-to-organic
carbon export ratio of about 0.06 to 0.08, i.e., only 6 to 8%
of the total carbon is exported out of the surface ocean in
the form of CaCO
3. Assuming that CaCO 3-precipitating
organisms have an inorganic-to-organic carbon ratio of
about 1:1 (as implied by a tight connection between
photosynthesis and calciﬁcation), this ratio suggests also
that only around 6 to 8% of the total organic matter
export is driven by CaCO
3-precipitating organisms.
While the downward carbon transport in the form of
CaCO
3 may be a small component of the total downward
transport of carbon by the two biological pumps, we
have seen in chapter 5 that CaCO
3 is singularly impor-
tant as a ballast material, having the highest efﬁciency in
transporting organic matter in particles through the
thermocline and into the deep ocean.
The low contribution of carbonate-secreting organ-
isms such as coccolithophorids to carbon export stands
in stark contrast to the export of opal, for which we have
seen that diatoms may account for half or more of the
export of organic matter (chapter 7). We have also seen
that the opal-to-organic matter export ratio varies sub-
stantially across oceanic regions (ﬁgure 7.2.4), with var-
iations by more than a factor of ﬁve between the low
latitudes and the Southern Ocean.
Inorganic-to-Organic Carbon Export Ratio
Is the inorganic-to-organic carbon export ratio as vari-
able as the export ratio of opal to organic matter? There
are only few and sparse sediment trap studies in the
upper ocean that would permit us to draw a global
picture. However, we can make use of the signals that
the formation and export of organic matter and CaCO
3
leave on the distribution of tracers in the ocean, much
as we used the tracer signals of the formation and ex-
port of opal and organic matter to infer the opal-to-
organic matter export ratio (see panel 7.2.1 in chapter
7). Sarmiento et al . [2002] showed that the ratio of the
upper ocean gradients of potential alkalinity and nitrate
is equal to the inorganic-to-organic carbon export ratio
if steady state is assumed and the data are averaged over
large spatial scales. Recall that potential alkalinity, P
Alk,
is equal to Alk þ NO/C0
3
, and its variations are only gov-
erned by the formation and dissolution of CaCO 3
[Brewer et al ., 1975].
Let us consider the vertical balance between a surface
box s and a thermocline box th. The horizontal extent of
these boxes is of the order of several 1000 kilometers,
such that the horizontal exchange time is of the order of
many years, much longer than the vertical exchange
time, which is of the order of one year or shorter. In
steady state, the downward export of organic carbon and
CaCO
3 needs to be equal to the upward supply of
363
Calcium Carbonate Cycle