to-organic carbon export ratio tends to be slightly higher
in the low latitudes, with values around 0.10, and tends to
be uniformly low in the Southern Ocean south of 45
/C14 S,
with values around 0.02. These spatial variations might
be a result of the fact that the coccolithophorids, which
are overall dominating the CaCO
3 export, are adapted to
relatively low turbulence regimes, such as the low lati-
tudes, and tend to get outcompeted by diatoms in high-
turbulence regimes [ Iglesias-Rodrı´guez et al. , 2002b].
Another factor might be simply differences in the silicic
acid concentrations, which permits coccolithophorids to
become more prevalent only after diatoms have lost their
competitive advantage by having exhausted all available
silicic acid.
As a consequence of the relatively uniform CaCO
3-to-
organic carbon export ratio, a map of the global export
ﬂux of calcium carbonate from surface waters looks
similar to a map of the global export ﬂux of organic
carbon (compare ﬁgure 4.2.4 with ﬁgure 9.2.2). This
CaCO
3 export map looks, however, rather different
from that for opal. Opal export is particularly large in
the high latitudes of the Southern Ocean where CaCO
3
export is negligible (ﬁgure 7.2.5).
We end with a cautionary note. While our focus here
is on the open ocean realm, it is important to note that a
substantial amount of CaCO
3 is also ﬁxed in near-shore
environments by coral and a few marine plants growing
attached at the bottom of the ocean, such as Halimeda
spp. Milliman and Droxler [1996] estimated that coral
reefs and carbonate shelves produce about 0.3 Pg C yr
/C0 1
of CaCO 3 each year, which is about a third of the open
ocean production. Most of this CaCO 3 is in the form of
aragonite or high-magnesium calcite, which has a
higher solubility than true calcite. Some of this material
might get eroded and transported into the open ocean,
but the magnitude of this transport is not well known.
Milliman et al . [1999] suggested that this transport may
be as large as 0.1 Pg C yr
/C0 1 (see ﬁgure 9.1.1).
9.3 Water Column Processes
Once the CaCO 3 particles leave the productive upper
layers of the ocean, they are potentially subject to dis-
solution. The primary driver for dissolution of CaCO
3
particles is thought to be the state of saturation of the
water with respect to the mineral phase. As we have
seen in ﬁgure 9.1.2, the upper waters are generally
supersaturated with respect to both mineral phases of
CaCO
3, whereas deep waters are undersaturated. We
therefore generally expect relatively little dissolution to
occur in the upper ocean, and substantial dissolution
only to take place once the CaCO
3 particles enter the
undersaturated zones of the water column. Under-
standing the dynamics of this dissolution of CaCO
3 is
not only important for the transport of CaCO 3 itself, but
also for the transfer of organic matter from the surface
into the ocean interior, since, as we have seen in
chapter 5, CaCO
3 represents one of the most important
ballast materials.
What determines the distribution of under- and
supersaturation of the water column with respect to
CaCO
3? This situation is obviously rather different from
that of opal, with respect to which we have seen that
waters are undersaturated almost everywhere. In order
to answer this question, we ﬁrst need to know the so-
lubilities of calcite and aragonite, and then we have to
understand the processes that control the concentra-
tions of the CO
2/C0
3 and dissolved calcium ions.
CaCO3 Solubility
Let us start by deﬁning the terms saturation, under-
saturation, and supersaturation. The equilibrium rela-
tionship for the dissolution reaction of mineral CaCO 3
(see reaction (8.3.13)) deﬁnes the solubility product,
K
CaCO3
sp ,
KCaCO3
sp ¼ [CO2/C0
3 ]sat[Ca2þ ]sat (9:3:1)
where [CO 2/C0
3 ]sat and [Ca 2 þ ]sat are the concentrations of
the carbonate and dissolved calcium ions in equilib-
rium with mineral CaCO
3. Equations for KCaCO3
sp with
respect to calcite and aragonite are given in table 9.3.1,
and numerical values are listed in table 9.3.3.
We deﬁne the degree of saturation, O, as the ratio
of the product of the solutes (sometimes called ion ac-
tivity product) over the product of the solutes at satu-
ration (solubility product),
O ¼ [CO2/C0
3 ][Ca2þ ]
[CO2/C0
3 ]sat[Ca2þ ]sat
¼ [CO2/C0
3 ][Ca2þ ]
KCaCO3
sp
(9:3:2)
where [CO 2/C0
3 ] and [Ca 2 þ ] are the observed carbonate
ion and calcium concentrations. We can calculate the
former from the measured DIC and Alk concentrations
using the equations given in table 8.2.1. The latter is
generally assumed to be constant (see below). When
O > 1, seawater is supersaturated with respect to min-
eral CaCO
3; conversely, when O < 1, seawater is un-
dersaturated.
Since dissolved calcium is a major constituent of
seawater with a mean concentration of about 10,280
mmol kg
/C0 1 (table 1.2.1), its concentration is almost three
orders of magnitude larger than that of CO 2/C0
3 .I na d d i -
tion, we have found in section 8.4 above that DIC vari-
ations caused by the formation and dissolution of CaCO3
365
Calcium Carbonate Cycle