on the dissolution processes governing the CaCO 3 dy-
namics in the water column. Given the present un-
certainties in understanding the dissolution processes,
accurate predictions of their response to future changes
are challenging.
However, regardless of the uncertainties associated
with the exact processes controlling water column dis-
solution of CaCO
3 particles, the difference from the
remineralization of organic matter remains striking.
For example, in a series of sediment traps distributed in
the Arabian Sea, 98% of the surface-produced particu-
late organic carbon disappeared on average before
reaching the traps at about 800 m, whereas only about
70% of the CaCO
3 disappeared [ Milliman et al. , 1999].
This is consistent with our analyses of the different
carbon pumps (see ﬁgure 8.4.2), which showed the
much deeper dissolution signal for CaCO
3 in compar-
ison to the shallower remineralization signal for or-
ganic matter. Consequently, CaCO
3 dissolution in the
water column is often modeled as a simple exponential
curve with a length scale on the order of 3500 m [ Najjar
and Orr, 1998; Yamanaka and Tajika, 1996], which leads
to a much slower rate of CaCO
3 dissolution in the water
column than achieved with the power law function
commonly used for organic matter remineralization.
The same conclusion holds if the newer double expo-
nential remineralization parameterizations for organic
matter are used (see chapter 5).
9.4 Diagenesis
Having followed the CaCO 3 cycle from the surface
down the water column, we ﬁnally arrive at the sedi-
ments. Because of the much smaller role of water col-
umn processes for CaCO
3, sediments processes play a
much more important role in the whole ocean budget
of CaCO
3 than in the cycling of organic matter (al-
though we have seen in chapter 6 that sediments play a
major role for organic matter cycling below 1000 to
2000 m). On the other hand, as can be seen from a
comparison of a deep ocean budget (>1000 m) for
CaCO
3 with that of organic matter (table 9.4.1), a much
bigger fraction of the CaCO 3 entering the ocean realm
below 1000 m depth ﬁnally gets buried in the sedi-
ments. In the case of organic matter, this fraction is
about 2%, whereas in the case of CaCO
3, this fraction is
approximately 19%. In this section, we analyze what
controls the amount of CaCO
3 that gets buried and how
this is related to the CaCO 3 burial pattern that we have
seen in ﬁgure 9.1.3.
Figure 9.4.1 shows in more detail the transition from
the depth where CaCO 3 is well preserved in the sedi-
ments to the depth where CaCO 3 is completely absent
from the sediments. The upper limit of the transition
zone, where sediments are subjected to very little dis-
solution, is often called the lysocline, whereas the depth,
where the sediments have lost virtually all their calcite
due to dissolution, is referred to as the calcite compen-
sation depth (CCD). At this depth the dissolution of
CaCO
3 in the sediments matches exactly the deposition
of CaCO3 at the top of the sediments.
When the lysocline and the CCD are mapped
throughout the oceans, an interesting pattern emerges
(ﬁgure 9.4.2). Not only does the lysocline get shallower
from the North Atlantic through the Indian to the
North Paciﬁc, but also the thickness of the transition
zone between the lysocline and the CCD varies strongly
from one place to another. We thus have two questions
that we want to answer: What controls the depth of the
lysocline, and what controls the thickness and shape
of the transition zone between the lysocline and
the CCD?
CaCO
3 Dissolution in Sediments
We have seen in chapter 7 that the dissolution of opal
in the ocean depends on two major factors. First, it is
inﬂuenced by the degree of undersaturation. Second, it
is inﬂuenced by the degree of incorporation of alu-
minium into the opal lattice and the impact of this on
opal solubility and dissolution kinetics.
One would expect that some of the same factors
would control the dissolution of CaCO
3 in the sedi-
ments. While this conclusion is correct, there are several
major differences between the dissolution of these two
minerals. The most important difference has to do with
Table 9.4.1
Deep ocean (>1000 m) budget for CaCO
3 and organic
carbon.
Organic
Carbona
Pg C yr/C0 1
CaCO3b
Pg C yr/C0 1 Ratioc
Input across 1000 m
depth horizon 0.87 0.70 1.2
Burial in
sediments /C0 0.02 /C0 0.13 0.2
Remineralization
or dissolution /C0 0.85 /C0 0.57 1.5
a Values are taken from Figure 6.5.3.
b Modiﬁed budget of Milliman et al . [1999]. The sinking ﬂux of
CaCO3 across 1000 m has been increased to account for the obser-
vation that the organic carbon–to–CaCO3 remineralization ratio in the
deep ocean is about 1. The resulting higher dissolution ﬂux from the
sediments is within the range of estimates (0.30 to 0.48 Pg C yr
/C0 1)
given by Archer [1996a, 1996b].
c Organic carbon–to–CaCO3 ratio.
374
Chapter 9