separation tends to be larger, because of higher accu-
mulation rates. The buffering of the protons freed by
remineralization is more effective as well, mainly be-
cause of a generally higher degree of bottom water su-
persaturation. Both effects will tend to lead to a decrease
in the efﬁciency of respiration to drive CaCO
3 dissolution
in shallower waters [ Hales, 2003]. In order to investigate
this coupling between the different reactions and their
interaction with diffusion and advection more quantita-
tively, we need a sediment model of early diagenesis,
which we will develop and apply in the next section.
Modeling C aCO
3 Diagenesis
Chapters 6 and 7 provide us with most of the building
blocks that we need to construct a model describing
CaCO
3 diagenesis. Since we are especially interested in
investigating the role of organic matter remineralization
on the dissolution of CaCO
3, we start out with the model
that we developed for organic matter diagenesis. We
need to add the CaCO
3-speciﬁc reactions and equa-
tions, i.e., a reaction equation for mineral CaCO 3, and
diffusion-reaction equations for all dissolved species of
the carbonate system in seawater, i.e., CO
2/C0
3 , HCO/C0
3
, and
H2CO*
3
. The three equations for CO 2/C0
3 , HCO /C0
3
, and
H2CO*
3
are coupled to each other by the dissociation
reactions of the carbonate system in seawater (reactions
8.2.1 to 8.2.3). Since these dissociation reactions are very
rapid, we can assume equilibrium for all practical pur-
poses. Finally, we have to add conservation equations for
DIC and Alk, as well as boundary conditions for DIC and
Alk. The complete set of equations is given in table 9.4.2.
These will now be discussed in more detail.
We begin with the equation describing the CaCO
3
content in the sediments. As is the case for organic
matter, we have to take into account three processes:
slow downward movement caused by the continuous
deposition of fresh particles at the sediment water in-
terface, bioturbation, and dissolution/remineralization
reactions. The ﬁrst two processes can be handled
identically to the organic matter equation (6.2.1), but
unlike the remineralization of organic matter, dissolu-
tion of mineral CaCO
3 is a purely chemical process. We
adopt (9.3.7) for sediments by taking the porosity f into
account, and expressing the CaCO 3 concentration in
terms of solids. This gives:
@(1/C0 f)[CaCO3]
@t ¼/C0 kCaCO3 /C1 [CaCO3](1 /C0 f)(1 /C0 O)n (9:4:2)
where [CaCO 3] is the concentration of CaCO 3 in units
of mmol m /C0 3 of solids.
We turn next to the solute equations for CO 2/C0
3 ,
HCO/C0
3
and H 2CO*
3
. Boudreau [1987] pointed out that
neglecting the reversible dissociation reactions between
CO
2/C0
3 , HCO /C0
3
, and H 2CO*
3
results in a signiﬁcant un-
derestimation of the diffusive transport. This underes-
timation occurs because each inorganic carbon species
is diffusing separately, experiencing a different spatial
concentration gradient. For example, a fraction of the
CO
2/C0
3 produced by the dissolution of CaCO 3 goes into
HCO/C0
3
and H 2CO*
3
, which are then transported away
independently of the diffusion of the CO 2/C0
3 ion.
Remineralization of organic matter in the sediments
produces H 2CO*
3
. Hence the organic matter degrada-
tion term from the organic matter equation appears as
a source in the reaction-diffusion equation for H
2CO*
3
(see table 9.4.2). By contrast, the dissolution of CaCO 3
releases CO 2/C0
3 ions. Therefore, the dissolution term
from the CaCO 3 equation needs to be included in the
CO2/C0
3 equation. In addition, the three governing equa-
tions for CO 2/C0
3 ,H C O/C0
3
, and H 2CO*
3
are linked to each
other by inorganic carbon system reactions in order to
maintain chemical equilibrium. These exchange terms
are denoted by R
pH.
To solve the system of equations of our diagenetic
model, we need to specify dissociation constants, deﬁne
DIC and Alk, and specify boundary conditions for all
solutes and solids. In particular, we need to provide the
rain rates of particulate organic matter and mineral
CaCO
3 as boundary conditions.
Several similar CaCO 3 diagenesis models have been
developed by various investigators [ Archer, 1991, 1996a;
Archer et al ., 1989; Jahnke et al ., 1994; Hales and Emer-
son, 1996] with varying details. The most important
difference in the models is the absence or inclusion of
anoxic remineralization of organic matter.
Model Applications
One of the goals of constructing this diagenetic model
was to assess the importance of calcite dissolution driven
by metabolic processes relative to that driven by bottom
water undersaturation. This can best be assessed by
simulating two extreme cases and then comparing them
to the pore water pH proﬁles shown in ﬁgure 9.4.5. In
the ‘‘no dissolution’’ case, the simulation includes only
organic matter remineralization and no dissolution of
CaCO
3 is permitted to occur. In the ‘‘no CO2’’ case, there
is no remineralization and calcite dissolves only in re-
sponse to bottom water undersaturation.
The results of these two cases applied to the three
sites on the Ontong-Java Plateau is plotted over the
observations in ﬁgure 9.4.5. The two curves for the two
scenarios represent upper and lower bounds of solu-
tions when the input parameters are varied within their
uncertainties. Neither of these cases can correctly re-
produce the in situ pH observations. In the ‘‘no disso-
lution’’ case, the simulated pH decreases rapidly with
depth, since the H
2CO*
3
added by remineralization
of organic matter does not get neutralized by CaCO 3
dissolution. In the ‘‘no CO 2’’ case, the modeled pH
379
Calcium Carbonate Cycle