increases with depth, since the CO 2/C0
3 is added to the
pore water without neutralization.
This shows that dissolution driven by metabolic CO 2
production plays a signiﬁcant role in determining the
pore water chemistry at these sites. Hales and Emerson
[1996] also determined which combination of input pa-
rameters reproduced the observations optimally (light
solid line in ﬁgure 9.4.5). They found from this statistical
evaluation of the pore water pH data and the model that
over 65% of the total dissolution is driven by metabolic
CO
2. Assuming a 4.5-order kinetics, this optimization
also constrains the calcite dissolution rate constants to
values of about 5 /C2 10
/C0 5 to 1.6/C2 10/C0 3 day/C0 1, lower than
most other ﬁeld results, but consistent with the general
trend of lower rate constants determined from ﬁeld ob-
servations compared with laboratory studies [Keir, 1980;
Archer et al., 1989; Hales et al., 1994; Berelson et al., 1994;
Jahnke et al ., 1994; Martin and Sayles , 1996; Hales and
Emerson, 1997]. Similar conclusions about the impor-
tance of respiration-driven dissolution have been found
from the North Atlantic [ Hales et al ., 1994] and the
eastern equatorial Paciﬁc [Berelson et al., 1994].
As outlined in the previous section, the importance of
respiration-driven dissolution in the sediments of the
deep Paciﬁc and Atlantic is at odds with the absence of
strong dissolution signals at shallower depths, as the
higher rates of organic matter delivery should create an
even larger tendency for respiration-driven dissolution.
Jahnke and Jahnke [2004] recently suggested that this
discrepancy could be reconciled by two possible mecha-
nisms: buffering of metabolic CO
2 by overlying water or
re-precipitation of CaCO3 in the supersaturated surface
sediments. Hales [2003] proposed recently that the buff-
ering may be greatly enhanced by the fact that organic
matter generally remineralizes faster than CaCO
3 is
being dissolved, so that the two processes tend to be
vertically separated in the sediments. As a result, the
efﬁciency of organic matter remineralization driving
CaCO
3 dissolution may be diminished, since many
protons generated by organic matter remineralization
diffuse into the overlying water column before they can
dissolve any CaCO
3.
Figure 9.4.6 shows that the degree of the depth sepa-
ration between organic matter remineralization and
CaCO
3 dissolution, and consequently, also CaCO 3 dis-
solution ﬂuxes and respiratory dissolution efﬁciencies,
may vary substantially in response to bottom water un-
dersaturation, O, and the assumptions being made about
the kinetics of organic matter remineralization. Respi-
ratory dissolution efﬁciency is deﬁned, for a speciﬁc or-
ganic matter component, as the mole ratio of CO
2 used to
dissolve CaCO 3 to total CO 2 generated. When Hales
[2003] used ﬁrst-order kinetics (i.e., n ¼ 1) for organic
matter remineralization in a model with one organic
component, about 80% of the CaCO
3 was dissolved by
respiration-driven dissolution when waters were under-
saturated, with this percentage decaying to about 50%
when waters were supersaturated by 30%. However,
when Hales [2003] assumed that organic matter in the
sediments was separated into a fast and a slowly decaying
pool (in analogy to the G-type kinetics that we introduced
in chapter 6). The respiration-driven dissolution efﬁciency
was substantially smaller, i.e., only about 50% in under-
saturated conditions, dropping to about 20% in supersat-
urated conditions. The dissolution ﬂuxes of CaCO
3 drop-
ped correspondingly. The main reason for this difference
is that in the case of the two-component model, the fast-
decaying fraction of organic matter is being remineralized
very close to the sediment-water interface so that most
protons generated from this reaction are being buffered
by the overlying water column before they can dissolve
any CaCO
3 in the sediments. The slowly decaying organic
matter fraction of the two-component model is also less
efﬁcient in dissolving CaCO
3 than the one-component
model, but only when the bottom water is supersaturated.
As the water becomes undersaturated, the buffer capacity
drops, and the slowly decaying fraction becomes more
efﬁcient. Although there is so far little corroborating ev-
idence for this being the correct mechanism, both this
water-column buffering mechanism and the CaCO
3 re-
precipitation mechanism of Jahnke and Jahnke [2004]
provide a possible explanation for the observation that
respiration-driven dissolution becomes less efﬁcient as
bottom waters become supersaturated.
Our model of CaCO
3 diagenesis permits us now to
investigate in detail which parameters and processes are
most important in determining the depth of the lyso-
cline and the thickness of the transition zone. It turns
out that the depth of the lysocline relative to the satu-
ration state of the overlying water column is primarily
determined by the ratio of the organic carbon to calcite
rain. We show also that the thickness of the transition
zone is controlled by the dissolution rate constant for
calcite, k
CaCO3 , and the rate of delivery of noncarbonate
refractory material, such as dust, to the sediments.
Unfortunately, neither the dissolution rate constant
nor the rain ratio are well known from observations. We
have discussed above that estimates for k
CaCO3 vary by
several orders of magnitude, leaving this parameter vir-
tually unconstrained. The situation is not as bad for the
organic carbon–to–CaCO
3 rain ratio. Sediment traps
below 2000 m measure ratios between 0.5 and 1.5, with a
mean of about 0.8 ± 0.2 [ Klaas and Archer , 2002]. The
relatively small variations in the organic carbon–to–
CaCO
3 rain ratio in the deep ocean have been interpreted
as evidence of a close association between organic matter
and CaCO
3, with the CaCO 3 providing the ballast to
transport the organic matter efﬁciently through the
water column (see discussion in chapter 5) [ Klaas and
Archer, 2002; Armstrong et al., 2002; Francois et al., 2002].
Nevertheless, this range is still too large to sufﬁciently
constrain a diagenetic model that attempts to reproduce
381
Calcium Carbonate Cycle