the observed lysocline distribution. However, given that
we have good observations of the CaCO
3 distribution in
sediments, one can turn the problem around and ask
whether it is possible to constrain the ill-known param-
eters with these observations, i.e., solve the inverse
problem.
In order to ﬁnd the optimal set of parameters, we ﬁrst
need to establish how the modeled lysocline changes in
response to variations of each parameter separately.
Figure 9.4.7a shows the simulated shape of the transition
between high and low calcite sediments as a function of
the dissolution rate for calcite, k
CaCO3 , using a 4.5-order
kinetics [Archer, 1991]. In this case an organic carbon–to–
CaCO3 rain ratio of 0.7 was used. As kCaCO3 increases,
both the ‘‘thickness’’ of the transition zone and the un-
dersaturation at the CCD decrease. However, above a
value of 3 day
/C0 1 the shape of the transition zone becomes
relatively insensitive to the value of kCaCO3 . These par-
ticular simulations were done with an exponent in the
dissolution kinetics ofn ¼ 4.5 (see (9.4.2)). If an exponent
n ¼ 1 were used as argued for by Hales and Emerson
[1997], the changes in the shape of the modeled lysocline
in response to changes in k
CaCO3 would remain similar,
but correspond to drastically different values of kCaCO3 .
Variations of the organic carbon–to–CaCO3 rain ratio
induce large changes in the shape of the transition zone
a
1.3
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
1.2
0.7 2468 1 0
One Organic Carbon
ComponentTwo 
Organic 
Carbon
Component
Respiratory Dissolution Efficiency
b
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
CaCO3 Dissolution Flux (mmol cm-2 yr-1)
Saturation State
No RespirationFast 
Component
Only Slow 
Component
Only
UNDERSATURATED SUPERSATURATED
One Organic Carbon
Component
Fast 
Component
Only
Slow 
Component
Only
Two 
Organic 
Carbon
Component
Figure 9.4.6: Calcite dissolution ﬂuxes and efﬁciency of respiration-driven dissolution as a function of the degree of bottom water
saturation, O. (a) Dissolution ﬂux driven by various forcing components. The heavy dashed line represents the dissolution that would
occur due to bottom-water undersaturation only. The dot-dashed line is the total calcite dissolution model, i.e., driven by bottom-water
undersaturation and organic matter remineralization in the two-organic carbon component model. The two light dashed lines show the
dissolution driven by each organic carbon component (fast or slow, as labeled) of that model. Note that the dissolution driven by the
slow component is fairly constant above the saturation horizon ( O ¼ 1) in comparison to that driven by the fast component, which is
near zero down to a bottom-water saturation of about 1.1, and then increases rapidly until the saturation horizon is reached. The solid
line shows, for comparison, the dissolution driven by a respiration formulation with a single-organic carbon component with a scale
depth of 2 cm. This respiration rate drives more dissolution for the same organic carbon rain than the two-component formulation in
all saturation cases, particularly above the saturation horizon. (b) Dissolution efﬁciency deﬁned as the ratio of the dissolution ﬂux
driven by a particular process to the amount of CO
2 produced. Note that the efﬁciency of the two-organic carbon component is only
about 0.2 above the saturation horizon, implying very small dissolution ﬂuxes for typical oceanic organic carbon rain rates. The
calculations were done for typical oligotrophic ocean-basin sediments with a calcite content of 50%, a ﬁrst-order dissolution reaction
(i.e., n¼1) with a rate constant of 1 /C2 10
/C0 4 day/C0 1, and a total organic carbon respiration rate of 13 mmol cm/C0 2 yr/C0 1. Modiﬁed from
Hales [2003].
382
Chapter 9