his model, a rain ratio of 0.5 leads to too strong pres-
ervation in the Atlantic, while a rain ratio of 1.0 leads to
almost no preservation in the Paciﬁc. A rain ratio of
about 0.7 seems to best represent the observations. This
value is in remarkably good agreement with the sedi-
ment trap–derived estimate of 0.8 ± 0.2 [Klaas and Archer,
2002]. Archer [1996a] also demonstrated that the main
cause of the differences in the thickness of the transition
zone between the Atlantic and Paciﬁc is the rain of non-
CaCO
3 material, with the Atlantic receiving much higher
rates of such material than the Paciﬁc.
Concluding Remarks
Before leaving this subject, we summarize the most
important conclusions. The promotion of calcium car-
bonate dissolution by the degradation of organic matter
plays a critical role in the dissolution of CaCO
3 in the
sediments. Model results indicate that as one goes from
supersaturated to undersaturated conditions in the
overlying water column, already 40% to 70% of the
CaCO
3 gets dissolved by this process when one reaches
saturation. This large dissolution percentage does not
necessarily show up as a large drop in the percent dry
weight CaCO
3 content of the sediments for reasons that
are discussed next.
The relationship between CaCO 3 rain, dissolution,
and ﬁnal CaCO 3 content in the sediments can be il-
lustrated by computing the ﬁnal CaCO 3 content, fCaCO3,
as a function of the proportion of CaCO 3 to inert (e.g.
terrigenous) material arriving at the sediment, R, and
of the fraction of the deposited CaCO 3 that dissolves in
the sediments, fdiss. This gives fCaCO3 ¼ (1 /C0 fdiss)/
(1 /C0 fdiss þ 1/R). If R ¼ 9 and fdiss ¼ 0, then fCaCO3 ¼ 90%.
If 50% of the CaCO3 dissolves, i.e., fdiss ¼ 0.5, the CaCO3
content in sediments is still very high at 82%. Even
with f
diss ¼ 0.9, the sediment CaCO 3 drops to just 47%.
Only if 99% of all CaCO 3 arriving at the sediments
dissolves, will the ﬁnal CaCO 3 sediment content fall
below 10%. Thus, the CaCO 3 content of sediments is
not a sensitive indicator of CaCO 3 dissolution ﬂuxes
until dissolution is very high, which also makes it dif-
ﬁcult to detect the onset of dissolution from the depth
of the lysocline.
9.5 Calcium Carbonate Compensation
One of the most exciting aspects of the marine CaCO 3
cycle is its possible role as a homeostat for regulating
the DIC and Alk budgets of the ocean on millennial and
longer timescales. Since the ocean carbon cycle controls
atmospheric CO
2 on these timescales, this homeostat is
also of great importance for controlling atmospheric
CO
2. Without negative feedbacks, slight imbalances
between the input and loss of alkalinity to the ocean
would over time lead to large changes in oceanic alka-
linity and hence atmospheric CO
2 concentrations. Such
large excursions in atmospheric CO 2 do not appear to
have occurred over the last tens of millions of years
[Prentice et al., 2001]. In order to have a stabilizing effect
on atmospheric CO
2, the CaCO 3 homeostat in the
ocean must somehow link the input of alkalinity with
the loss of alkalinity in order to maintain a balance
between the two. As implied in ﬁgure 9.1.1, the major
inputs of alkalinity into the open ocean are export from
the margins (mainly river input of weathering-derived
alkalinity) and input from hydrothermal vents. The
only loss term is the burial of CaCO
3 at the sea ﬂoor.
At ﬁrst view, the input and loss processes seem to be
completely uncoupled, so the existence of a strong cou-
pling between these processes seems surprising. How-
ever, we have seen that the preservation of CaCO
3 in the
sea-ﬂoor sediments is determined by a number of factors
and most importantly by the degree of undersaturation
of the seawater with respect to calcite. As the saturation
state is governed by the concentration of the CO
2/C0
3 ion,
any process that changes the concentration of CO 2/C0
3 in
the deep ocean necessarily alters also the preserva-
tion pattern of CaCO
3 in the sediments. Because
[CO2/C0
3 ]&Alk/C0 DIC, a change in the CO 2/C0
3 ion content
can be generated either by changes in the alkalinity
supply to the open ocean or by changes in the ocean
biological pumps that affect DIC. The ﬁrst mechanism
thus opens the possibility for maintaining a long-term
‘‘external’’ balance in the ocean between the input and
loss of alkalinity. The second mechanism plays an
important role in many scenarios that attempt to ex-
plain glacial-interglacial changes in atmospheric CO
2.
It builds on the premise that any anomaly in the deep
ocean CO
2/C0
3 content generated by the processes that
are invoked to explain the lower atmospheric CO 2
concentration needs to be removed in order to re-
establish the balance between input and burial of Alk.
This process, termed ‘‘CaCO
3 compensation’’ [Broecker
and Peng , 1987], can either enhance or diminish the
effect of the original process in changing atmospheric
CO
2. We will ﬁrst discuss the CaCO 3 homeostat and its
role in maintaining the ‘‘external’’ balance between
input and burial. We will discuss the second mecha-
nism thereafter.
CaCO
3 Homeostat
In order to understand the mechanisms that link varia-
tions in the alkalinity input to variations in the burial of
CaCO
3, let us turn to ﬁgure 9.5.1. In the present steady
state, the alkalinity input by rivers and hydrothermal
384
Chapter 9