dissolved in the sediments. This is the feedback that keeps
alkalinity in the ocean within rather tight bounds and
hence provides a strong constraint on how much atmo-
spheric CO
2 can vary over time. Using a multi-box model,
Keir [1995] showed that a doubling of the weathering input
leads to only a 25 to 35 ppm reduction in atmospheric
CO
2. This small change is supported by the more recent
results of Archer et al. [2000b] on the basis of a 3-D ocean
biogeochemistry model that has been coupled to a sedi-
ment model similar to that described above.
The strength of this negative feedback depends on how
strongly the saturation state of the bottom water deter-
mines the dissolution of CaCO
3 in the sediments. This
CaCO3 homeostat would be weaker if parameters other
than the CO 2/C0
3 ion concentration of the bottom waters
were exerting a more dominant control. We have learned
above that the remineralization of organic matter has a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the dissolution of CaCO
3 in
the sediments. However, as long as the organic matter–
to–CaCO
3 rain ratio arriving at the sediments is below
1:1, the saturation state of the bottom water remains the
dominant factor. We have also seen that the efﬁciency of
respiration-driven dissolution tends to decrease strongly if
bottom waters are supersaturated, even in cases where the
rain ratio is well above 1:1. There are thus substantial
limits for how strongly the ocean’s lysocline can deviate
from the saturation horizon [Sigman et al., 1998].
An important note remains to be added regarding
the timescale of the CaCO
3 homeostat. One might be
tempted to argue that the timescale is of the order of
the residence time of alkalinity in the ocean, which is
about 100 kyr. However, it turns out that the e-folding
timescale for the oceanic adjustment is only about
5–10 kyr [ Archer et al ., 1997, 2000b]. This rather sur-
prising result is again a consequence of the peculia-
rities of the oceanic CO
2 system. Only about 5% of the
DIC in the ocean is in the form of CO 2/C0
3 . Thus the
CO2/C0
3 content of seawater can adjust approximately 20
times faster than the 10 5 years it takes to change the
entire DIC pool by the input from weathering processes
and volcanic outgassing. The CaCO 3 homeostat is
therefore able to interact with the global carbon cycle on
timescales shorter than the 100 kyr cycle associated
with the glacial-interglacial climate cycles of the last
million years.
CaCO
3 Compensation
The balance between river input of alkalinity and burial
can also be changed by ocean internal changes, such as
alterations of the marine production of CaCO
3, or chan-
ges in the oceanic distribution of DCO2/C0
3 . We have seen
above that the latter is mainly controlled by the soft-tissue
pump. Therefore any change of the ocean’s biological
pumps will upset the ocean’s alkalinity balance and re-
quire an adjustment of the ocean’s carbonate cycle.
However, the response of the latter to changes in the two
biological pumps is fundamentally different.
In the case of the carbonate pump, a change in the
production and export of CaCO
3 will lead directly to an
imbalance between river input of alkalinity and burial,
which is then adjusted by a change of the depth of the
lysocline until a new balance is achieved. This carbonate
compensation response is fundamentally similar to the
external homeostat described above. Figure 9.5.2a shows
how the various components of the oceanic system react
to a sudden decrease in the CaCO
3 ﬂux from the upper
ocean, and how the new equilibrium of the ocean’s al-
kalinity balance is achieved.
Initially, the unabated input of Alk by rivers, coupled
with decreased burial, leads to a rapid increase in mean
ocean alkalinity, which also causes ocean mean [CO
2/C0
3 ]t o
go up. As a result, the lysocline starts to deepen, so that a
greater fraction of the produced CaCO
3 can be buried.
The process continues until the lysocline has reached a
depth at which burial of Alk is equal to the river input of
Alk. The increase in ocean mean Alk also decreases the
oceanic buffer factor, leading to an imbalance of inor-
ganic carbon between the atmosphere and ocean. The
balance is restored by the ocean taking up CO
2 from the
atmosphere, hence causing a drawdown of atmospheric
CO
2. In addition to this ‘‘open system’’ response [Sigman
and Boyle, 2000], atmospheric CO2 is further drawn down
by a ‘‘closed system’’ response, which is more direct and
exists even in the absence of a need to balance the ocean’s
alkalinity input. This closed system response is simply a
consequence of the fact that a reduction in the surface
export of CaCO
3 will lead to an increase in surface ocean
Alk, which will tend to lower oceanic pCO2, and hence
lead to an uptake of CO 2 from the atmosphere. Using a
multi-compartment model of the ocean,Sigman and Boyle
[2000] showed that the ‘‘open system’’ response to a
halving of the CaCO
3 export lowers atmospheric CO2 by
about 20 ppm, whereas the ‘‘closed system’’ response
leads to a change in atmospheric CO
2 of about 30 ppm.
The two changes are cumulative, so that the total atmo-
spheric CO
2 change is about 50 ppm. However, as we will
discuss in chapter 10 in more detail, the exact magnitude
of the atmospheric CO
2 response depends quite sensiti-
vitely on the ocean model being employed [Broecker et al.,
1999a, Archer et al., 2000a]. The open and closed system
responses are also associated with quite different time-
scales. The closed system response has a timescale of
maximally a few hundred years, primarily determined by
the whole ocean overturning timescale. By contrast, the
open system response is quite slow, of the order of hun-
dreds to thousands of years, primarily because of the low
rates of CaCO
3 burial and the slow kinetics of sediment
dissolution.
The response of the oceanic carbonate system to
changes in the soft-tissue pump are quite different. In
this case, and disregarding the potential role of a change
386
Chapter 9