in the rain ratio on the decoupling of preservation from
the saturation horizons, the main perturbation to the
oceanic Alk balance consists of a change in the oceanic
distribution of [CO
2/C0
3 ], which changes the distribution of
DCO2/C0
3 , and hence the depth of the saturation horizons.
In the case of a sudden increase of the soft-tissue pump,
the concentration of deep ocean CO
2/C0
3 would fall quite
strongly, leading to a rapid shoaling of the saturation
horizon. Assuming that the depth of the saturation ho-
rizon is the main factor controlling preservation, this
would lead to a large increase in CaCO
3 dissolution,
which increases ocean mean Alk and hence [CO2/C0
3 ]. As a
consequence, the lysocline starts to deepen again until it
has reached a level where the ocean’s alkalinity balance is
again met. This depth will be somewhat shallower than
the original depth of the lysocline, with the exact location
depending on the the intial [CO
2/C0
3 ] distribution and
where the additionally exported organic carbon gets re-
mineralized in the water column.
As was the case for the carbonate pump, a change of
the soft-tissue pump will lead to both open and closed
system responses of atmospheric CO
2 (ﬁgure 9.5.2b).
The closed system response is a result of the drawdown
of surface ocean DIC induced by organic matter export,
which will lead to an uptake of CO
2 from the atmo-
sphere. The open system response is a consequence of
the increase in ocean mean Alk, and will enhance the
closed system response by removing additional CO
2
from the atmosphere. The exact magnitude of these
two responses depends quite sensitively on the model
being employed. For a 30% increase in the soft-tissue
pump and using a multi-box model, Sigman and Boyle
[2000] estimated a drawdown of 46 ppm, with most of
this being driven by the closed system response
(43 ppm), and the open system response adding only
3 ppm.
In summary, the ocean’s need for establishing a long-
term Alk balance (i.e., the open system response) leads to
a tendency for carbonate compensation to enhance the
initial (i.e., closed system) response of atmospheric CO
2
to changes in the ocean’s biological pumps, i.e., acting as
a positive feedback in the system. This has important
–5,000 0 5,000 10,000 15,000
Years
Lysocline depth
Atmospheric CO2
CaCO3 export
Mean ocean Alk
Mean ocean DIC
Surface Alk
Surface DIC
closed system response open and closed system response 
CARBONATE PUMP
–5,000 0 5,000 10,000 15,000
Years
Lysocline depth
Atmospheric CO2
Org. matter export
Mean ocean Alk
Mean ocean DIC
Surface Alk
Surface DIC
SOFT-TISSUE PUMP
ab
open system
enhancement
closed system
perturbation perturbation
open system
enhancement
closed system
Figure 9.5.2: Response of the ocean carbon system and atmospheric CO 2 to (a) a sudden decrease in the surface export of CaCO 3, and
(b) a sudden increase in the surface export of organic matter. The closed system responses are shown by the dashed lines, while the open
system responses, i.e., those that include the river/burial balance of Alk, are shown as solid lines. The curves are approximate.
387
Calcium Carbonate Cycle