9.12 Observations indicate that, during the last glacial maximum, the lysocline
was deeper in the Atlantic, but shallower in the Paciﬁc relative to the
present ocean.
a. What determines the depth of the lysocline in the present ocean?
b. Given your response to (a), how would you have to change these pro-
cesses in order to obtain the observed lysocline changes during the last
glacial maximum?
9.13 Explain the difference between the calcium carbonate compensation depth
(CCD) and the lysocline. Address, in particular, what determines the differ-
ence in depth between the two (e.g., ﬁgure 9.4.1).
9.14 Discuss why a much larger fraction of the CaCO
3 entering the ocean realm
below 1000 m gets buried in the sediments in comparison to organic matter.
9.15 Explain the process of respiration-driven CaCO 3 dissolution and discuss its
signiﬁcance for the preservation of CaCO 3 in the sediments.
9.16 Discuss what is meant by the terms ‘‘open system response’’ and ‘‘closed
system response’’ in the context of the oceanic CaCO 3 cycle. In particular,
explain why this difference is important in determining the response
of atmospheric CO
2 to perturbations in the strength of the ocean’s
biological pump.
9.17 What is the timescale associated with the open system response, and which
processes determine this timescale?
9.18 Consider the stacked three-box model used for problem 7.14 in chapter 7. Use
this model with the same geometry and exchange rates given in problem 7.14
to investigate the impact of differential remineralization of CaCO
3 and
organic matter on atmospheric CO 2. Assume that the CaCO 3-to-organic
carbon mole ratio of export production is 0.06.
a. Calculate the fractions gC org and gCaCO3 of the ﬂux out of the surface box
of organic carbon and CaCO 3 that get remineralized/dissolved in the
thermocline box, assuming an exponential length-scale for organic
carbon of z
*
C org
¼ 500 m and for CaCO 3 of z*
CaCO
3 ¼ 3000 m.
b. Calculate the steady-state surface concentrations of DIC and Alk, given
a phosphate concentration in the surface box of 0 mmol m /C0 3 and a
global mean phosphate concentration of 2.0 mmol m /C0 3. Assume that
the uptake and remineralization of phosphate is tied with a ﬁxed
stoichiometric ratio to the generation and remineralization of organic
carbon. Assume also that there are no sediments, i.e., all organic matter
and CaCO
3 entering the deep box gets remineralized/dissolved there.
Use the global mean Alk and DIC given in table 8.2.4.
c. Investigate how atmospheric pCO2 changes in response to changes
in the fractions gC org and gCaCO3 . How much can you draw down
atmospheric CO 2 by reducing gCaCO3 to zero? Use a global mean sur-
face temperature of 20 /C14 C and a salinity of 35 for the surface box.
Hint: Use the lookup table for problem 8.14 in chapter 8 to compute
pCO
2.
d. How would your answer to (c) change if you included an inﬁnitely large
CaCO3 sediment pool in the deep box?
391
Calcium Carbonate Cycle