Chapter 10
Carbon Cycle, CO 2, and Climate
Throughout most of this book, our discussions have
focused on the steady-state characteristics of the cycles
of biogeochemically important elements in the ocean.
However, as more about the past behavior of these cy-
cles was learned, we have to come to realize that these
cycles have seldom been in a ‘‘true’’ steady state. It
appears that variability is as much a fundamental prop-
erty of these biogeochemical cycles as it is a property of
the climate system in general (see discussion in section
2.5). In this last chapter, we explore the variability of
these cycles on a range of timescales, from a few years
to several hundred thousand years. In trying to un-
derstand the mechanisms that give rise to these varia-
tions, we will apply many of the tools and concepts that
we have learned in the previous nine chapters. We will
focus on the carbon cycle, because of its central role in
biogeochemical cycling and its interaction with climate
as a result of the greenhouse gas properties of CO
2 in
the atmosphere. This cycle is also of particular interest
given the fact that humankind has began to perturb the
global carbon cycle dramatically and likely will continue
to do so.
10.1 Introduction
A very good indicator for the state of the global carbon
cycle is atmospheric CO
2, since it represents the con-
centration of a relatively small reservoir that acts as a
conveyor for the exchange of carbon between the two
other important reservoirs of the global carbon cycle:
the terrestrial biosphere, including the soils, and the
ocean, including its sediments (ﬁgure 10.1.1). The
amount of CO
2 in the atmosphere is also small com-
pared with the gross exchange ﬂuxes between it and the
ocean and terrestrial biosphere, as reﬂected in the short
residence time of about 6 to 8 years for CO
2 in the
atmosphere with respect to these exchange ﬂuxes. At-
mospheric CO
2 is therefore expected to react sensitively
to changes in the global carbon cycle.
Thanks to the preservation of tiny air bubbles in ice
cores, researchers have been able to reconstruct con-
centrations of atmospheric CO
2 over the last 400,000
years with great precision [ Inderm€uhle et al. , 1999; Petit
et al. , 1999]. A summary of such reconstructions in
ﬁgure 10.1.2 shows that atmospheric CO 2 has varied by
nearly 100 ppm over the last 400,000 years, indicating
that substantial changes must have occured in the
distribution of carbon between the different reservoirs.
Several observations stand out in ﬁgure 10.1.2. First,
atmospheric CO
2 has varied quasi-periodically over the
last 400,000 years between approximately 180 ppm and
280 ppm. These variations occurred in close concert
with the glacial-interglacial cycles, with fully glacial
conditions coinciding with the lower-bound CO
2 con-
centration of about 180 ppm, and interglacial condi-
tions experiencing the upper-bound concentrations of
about 280 ppm. This upper bound appears to be rather
stable, and also characterizes the largest part of the
current interglacial, the Holocene.
The cause for these glacial-interglacial changes must
be connected with the oceanic carbon cycle, since this
reservoir controls atmospheric CO
2 on any timescale
longer than a few hundred years. We will discuss many
hypotheses and mechanisms that have been proposed
over the last two decades to explain these observed
changes, but as it turns out, no mechanism proposed so
far has been able to explain all existing constraints. In
the near future, as scientists learn more about ocean
circulation, biogeochemistry, and their interaction with
the climate system during ice ages from detailed ana-
lyses of climate records, we likely will be able to cor-
rectly identify the mechanisms. However, at the mo-
ment the causes of the glacial-interglacial variations in
392