genic CO2 (or any other passive and conservative tracer)
that is injected into the mixed layer decreases [Joos et al.,
1996]. In addition to its value as a tracer of oceanic
transport processes, the mixed layer pulse has proved
valuable in developing simple models of the ocean
carbon sink. By contrast with the use of an atmospheric
pulse, in which the response function depends on the
amount of carbon added because of how this affects the
buffer capacity, use of a mixed layer pulse response
with direct calculation of the air-sea equilibration gives
a model that does not depend on the pulse size (see Joos
et al. [1996]). Figure 10.2.4 shows such mixed layer
pulse-response functions for different ocean carbon
models for the ﬁrst 100 years. All models show a rela-
tively rapid removal of the pulse in the ﬁrst few years,
followed by a strongly decelerated decrease with time.
Joos et al. [1996] demonstrated that these pulse-re-
sponse functions can be very closely approximated by
ﬁtting to them a series of exponential functions. In the
case of the 3-D circulation model, their ﬁts show that
about 64% of the initial pulse disappears with an
e-folding time of less than a year. An additional 23%
decays with an e-folding timescale of 2 years, 6% with
an e-folding timescale of 15 years, 3% with an e-folding
timescale of 65 years, and 2% with an e-folding time-
scale of 348 years. The response function asymptotes to
a value of about 2% of the initial pulse, since this
constitutes the ocean mean concentration after the
whole ocean has equilibrated with the initial pulse. The
various timescales can be interpreted as reﬂecting how
quickly waters are transported into different depth
realms of the ocean. Because upper ocean ventilation is
relatively vigorous, the anthropogenic CO
2 is, at ﬁrst,
quickly removed from the upper ocean mixed layer.
However, ocean ventilation tends to decrease with in-
creasing depth, so it takes longer for anthropogenic
CO
2 to be transported into these deeper realms.
These pulse-response functions not only provide a
measure of timescales, but also quantitatively describe
the entire dynamics of the transport of anthropogenic
CO
2 and any other passive and conservative tracers
from the surface mixed layer into the ocean’s interior.
This is because oceanic transport and mixing is linear,
and up to now, we can assume that ocean circulation
has not changed dramatically over the last 200 years.
We can therefore use these pulse-response functions
(also referred to as Green’s functions) as a basis for a
very simple model that permits us to accurately esti-
mate the uptake of any passive and conservative tracer
by the ocean without resorting to simulations with
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ocean mixed layer response
Time (years)
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
0 2 4 6 8 10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2-D model
Box-diffusion model
HILDA
3-D model
Figure 10.2.4: Effective mixed layer pulse-response functions, rs = dNML=dNML
Initial , for the box-diffusion model, the HILDA
model, the 2-D model, and the Princeton general circulation model. Inset shows the pulse-response functions for the ﬁrst
ten years. Modiﬁed from Joos et al. [1996].
404
Chapter 10