much more complex two- and three-dimensional ocean
biogeochemical models (see Joos et al. [1996] for a
complete description of the method).
Let us describe the pulse response function as r
s(t).
The surface concentration of anthropogenicDIC, Cant(t)
(mmol m /C0 3), where t is any time after the beginning of
the Anthropocene, to, reﬂects the accumulated air-sea
ﬂux of anthropogenic CO 2 from the atmosphere, Fas
(mmol m/C0 2 yr/C0 1), weighted by how much of this up-
take has been transported away into the interior over
time. This weighting is described by the pulse response
function, r
s. This gives:
Cant(t) ¼ 1
h
Z t
to
Fant(t0)rs(t /C0 t0)dt0 (10:2:13)
where h is the depth of the surface mixed layer. As is
the case for any gas (see chapter 3, equation (3.3.6)), the
air-sea ﬂux of anthropogenic CO
2 is directly propor-
tional to the air-sea partial pressure difference of an-
thropogenic CO
2 and a gas exchange coefﬁcient, kg,
(mmol m/C0 2 yr/C0 1 matm/C0 1),
Fant(t) ¼ kg (dpCOatm
2
(t) /C0 dpCOoc
2
(t)) (10 :2:14)
where dpCO2 denotes the anthropogenic perturbation
to atmospheric and oceanic pCO2 in matm. The an-
thropogenic perturbation of oceanic pCO2 is linked to
Cant(t) by the buffer factor gDIC:
dpCOoc
2
(t) ¼ gDIC
a Cant(t) (10 :2:15)
where a is the DIC/pCO2 ratio (see eq. (10.2.9)).
By combining (10.2.13) with (10.2.14) and (10.2.15),
and using a pulse-response function rs(t) determined
from one of the models, the oceanic uptake of anthro-
pogenic CO
2 for any given time trajectory of the atmo-
spheric CO 2 perturbation can be computed with great
accuracy. The only limiting assumption is that the oce-
anic circulation has to remain steady. Joos et al. [1996]
provide accurate formulations for the buffer factor g
DIC
over a wide range of atmospheric CO2 perturbations and
also functional forms for the pulse response functions
r
s(t) for a suite of ocean biogeochemical models.
Buffering by Sediment C aCO3
The dynamics of the buffering of anthropogenic CO2 by
sea-ﬂoor CaCO 3 is very slow and takes thousands of
years (ﬁgure 10.2.2). This is much slower than the
timescale of hundreds of years involved in taking up
anthropogenic CO
2 from the atmosphere and trans-
porting it from the surface into the interior of the
ocean. An important reason for the slow dynamics of
sea-ﬂoor CaCO
3 buffering is that most of the CaCO 3 in
the sediments is found at mid-depths of the water col-
umn (see ﬁgure 9.1.3). Anthropogenic CO
2 must ﬁrst
reach these depths before it can start to dissolve the
CaCO3 in the sediments. In addition, the rate of dis-
solution induced by anthropogenic CO 2 seems to be
relatively small [ Archer et al. , 1998], a result of slow
diffusion of the bottom water signal into the sediments
as well as the slow kinetics of dissolution (see chapter
9). This increases the timescale for the sea-ﬂoor neu-
tralization of anthropogenic CO
2 further.
The exact timescales for the neutralization of the
anthropogenic CO 2 with calcium carbonate are associ-
ated with quite large uncertainties. Fortunately, these
timescales are sufﬁciently long so that the contribution
of calcium carbonate buffering can be neglected when
considering anthropogenic CO
2 uptake over the last
two centuries and well into the next century. This is
supported by the results of Archer et al. [1998], who
found that the difference between the oceanic uptake of
a model with and without calcium carbonate was much
less than 1%. In contrast to the anthropogenic CO
2
perturbation, these buffering reactions are of great
importance when considering millennial timescale
changes in the global carbon cycle, as they give rise to
substantial feedbacks, as discussed in association with
CaCO
3 compensation in chapter 9.
Anthropogenic CO 2 Uptake
So far, we have found that it will take several hundred, if
not thousands of years until anthropogenic CO 2 is fully
equilibrated between the atmosphere, the ocean, and the
sediments on the sea ﬂoor. For human societies, how-
ever, it is of much more concern to know the current
redistribution of anthropogenic carbon in the global
carbon cycle and how this may change over the next few
decades. This is a topic of intense research, and a number
of breakthroughs in the past decade have permitted the
scientiﬁc community to put relatively strong constraints
on the oceanic uptake of anthropogenic CO
2 (see dis-
cussion in Prentice et al. [2001], Sarmiento and Gruber
[2002], and Sabine et al. [2004]).
In the global budget of anthropogenic CO 2 (table
10.2.1), there are only two terms that have been mea-
sured directly. One is the emission of CO
2 by burning
of fossil fuel and cement manufacture. The other is the
increase in the atmospheric CO
2 concentration, which
has been measured directly since 1958 at Mauna Loa,
Hawaii and the South Pole [ Keeling et al. , 1989]. These
measurements have been extended back in time by
measuring CO
2 in ice cores and ﬁrn [ Neftel et al., 1985;
Etheridge et al. , 1996]. The remaining two budget
terms (ocean uptake, net exchange with the terrestrial
biosphere) have to be estimated by less direct means.
We focus here on the oceanic uptake only. A good
understanding of the magnitude and variability of the
oceanic sink for anthropogenic CO
2 also provides im-
portant constraints for the net exchange of anthropo-
405
Carbon Cycle, CO 2, and Climate