of organic matter since the water parcel was last in
contact with the atmosphere, and the second term
represents the corresponding change in DIC due to the
dissolution of CaCO
3. The factor 1/2 arises from the
fact that the dissolution of CaCO3 changes Alk and DIC
in a 2:1 ratio. The AOU term in the carbonate correc-
tion term is a result of the inﬂuence of the soft-tissue
pump on Alk (see chapter 8).
The easiest way of interpreting (10.2.18) is to view
it in direct analogy to the computing of preformed
properties discussed in chapter 5. The expression
DIC
obs/C0 DDICbio is directly equivalent to the computa-
tion of a preformed concentration, i.e., the biological
correction takes a water sample at any given location in
the ocean interior and moves it back to the surface,
where it was last in contact with the atmosphere. The
anthropogenic CO
2 concentration is then the difference
between this preformed DIC concentration and the
preformed concentration that existed in preindustrial
times, DIC
0
pi:
However, the Brewer, Chen and Millero approach
never found general acceptance, since the uncertainties
were regarded as too large [ Shiller, 1981, 1982; Broecker
et al. , 1985b], particularly because of very large un-
certainties associated with the estimation of DIC
0
pi.
However, Gruber et al. [1996] showed that this approach
can be signiﬁcantly improved by taking advantage of
the fact that we can estimate water mass ages on the
basis of a number of transient tracers (see discussion in
chapter 2).
The most relevant change to the original technique
by Brewer and by Chen and Millero was to separate the
DIC
0
pi term into a preindustrial equilibrium term, i.e.,
the DIC concentration a given water parcel would have
if it had been in equilibrium with preindustrial atmo-
spheric CO
2 for a given salinity S, temperature T, and
preformed alkalinity Alk0, i.e., DICeq pi and a disequi-
librium term DDICdiseq, i.e.,
DIC0
pi ¼ DICeq pi þ DDICdiseq (10:2:20)
Inserting (10.2.20) into (10.2.18) gives
Cant ¼ DICobs /C0 DDICbio /C0 DICeq pi /C0 DDICdiseq (10:2:21)
¼ DC* /C0 DDICdiseq (10:2:22)
where we combined the ﬁrst three terms on the right-
hand side of (10.2.21) into DC*. The tracer DC*i s
nearly conservative in the ocean interior and can be
calculated on the basis of concurrent observations of
DIC, Alk, temperature, salinity, oxygen, and nutrients.
This tracer is also directly related to the C* tracer used
in chapter 8 for separating the different pump com-
ponents from the observed variations of DIC.T h e
reader interested in details is referred to Gruber et al.
[1996] and Gruber and Sarmiento [2002].
Therefore, in order to estimate C
ant, we are left with
the need to estimate the disequilibrium term DDICdiseq.
Given an equilibration timescale of nearly a year for the
air-sea exchange of CO
2, this disequilibrium term,
which corresponds directly to a DpCO2 at the time a
water parcel was last in contact with the atmosphere,
can be quite large.
Gruber et al. [1996] made three important assump-
tions to estimate DDIC
diseq. First, they argued that the
expected changes of this disequilibrium over time are
small, and therefore assumed it to be constant. Their
argument was based on the expectation that the long-
term change in this disequilibrium driven by the an-
thropogenic CO
2 perturbation is on the order of a few
mmol kg/C0 1 only. Although this argument is correct, the
fact that the disequilibrium is actually changing over
time makes this assumption one of the largest sources
of error in this method (cf. Matsumoto and Gruber
[2005]). The second assumption is that ocean circula-
tion and mixing occurs predominantly along isopycnal
surfaces, permitting us to do the analyses on them.
This requires also the consideration of the different
end-members present on these isopycnals. Finally, the
method assumes that the natural carbon cycle has re-
mained in an approximate steady-state over the An-
thropocene, i.e. the last 250 years.
With these assumptions, the estimation of DDIC
diseq
is straightforward when examining deep isopycnal
surfaces that have slowly ventilated regions where it is
safe to assume that there is no anthropogenic CO
2 (see
ﬁgure 10.2.6a). In those regions, Cant in (10.2.22) is
zero, and we can estimate the disequilibrium for the
water mass i that dominates this portion of the iso-
pycnal surface simply by averaging DC*:
DDICi
diseq(s) ¼ DC*js ¼ const (10:2:23)
This approach fails, however, on isopycnal surfaces that
are shallower and rapidly ventilated. Here anthropogenic
CO
2 has already affected the entire density surface, and
therefore no uncontaminated region can be found. For
these density surfaces,Gruber et al. [1996] take advantage
of the availability of age tracers that permit them to esti-
mate the ventilation age of a water parcel. One can then
compute theDIC equilibrium concentration at the time,t,
a water parcel was last in contact with the atmosphere,
DIC
eq(t), which given the assumption of a constant air-
sea disequilibrium differs from DICeq pi by Cant., i.e.
DICeq(t) ¼ DICeq pi þ Cant. One could use this ‘‘shortcut’’
method to estimate Cant (see McNeil et al .[ 2 0 0 3 ]f o ra n
application), but the neglect of the change in the air-sea
disequilibrium makes this shorcut method biased high.
Instead,Gruber et al.[ 1 9 9 6 ]i n s e r t e dDIC
eq(t) into (10.2.21)
and solved for DDICdiseq ¼ DICobs /C0 DICbio /C0 DICeq(t),
where the right hand side was equated with the modiﬁed
DC* tracer, DC
/C3
t
. Thus analyzing the variations ofDC/C3
t
on
409
Carbon Cycle, CO 2, and Climate