that they have continued to do so ever since. There are
two lines of evidence that support this hypothesis. First,
atmospheric CO
2 remained remarkably stable for several
thousand years before the eighteenth century (see ﬁgure
10.1.2), indicating that the ﬂuxes controlling the surface
ocean total carbon content were in balance. Second, ac-
cording to present knowledge, marine phytoplankton are
controlled by nutrients (including micronutrients), light,
and vertical stability of the water column, but not by the
CO
2 concentration. Therefore the biological pumps do
not sequester anthropogenic carbon, but rather act as a
natural background process continuing to work as in
preindustrial times.
The lack of a role of marine biota in the uptake of an-
thropogenic CO
2 over the last two centuries is demon-
strated by the model study of Murnane et al. [1999], who
carried out a simulation of oceanic uptake in two models,
one that contained just the solubility pump and a second
combined simulation that included the biological pump.
The combined simulation took up 5% less anthropogenic
CO
2 than the solubility model, indicating that adding bi-
ology had only a minimal impact on the anthropogenic
CO
2 uptake. The small reduction in uptake occurs be-
cause the biological pump reduces surface alkalinity and
hence storage capacity for anthropogenic CO
2. If the sol-
ubility simulation used the same surface alkalinities as the
combined model, then both would take up the same
amount of anthropogenic CO
2.
One cannot assume, however, that the steady-state
operation of the biological pumps will continue forever
into the future. Moreover, the above discussion about the
possible impact of the observed ocean warming on the
oceanic oxygen cycle even suggests that the steady-state
assumption for the oceanic carbon cycle over the twen-
tieth century may need to be reevaluated.
Future climate changes associated with the buildup
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will quite likely
modify the biological pump–driven ﬂuxes, which could
then feed back on the atmospheric composition. Al-
terations of the biological pumps, for instance, have
been proposed as a possible cause for the dramatic
changes in atmospheric CO
2 between the glacial and
interglacial periods. It is difﬁcult at present to assess
how the biological pump will respond to future climate
changes and how it will interact with changes in ocean
circulation and mixing.
Future CO
2 Uptake
The primary factor controlling the future uptake of
anthropogenic CO 2 by the ocean is the atmospheric
CO2 burden in excess over the atmospheric CO 2 con-
centration in equilibrium with the total emissions
[Sarmiento et al. , 1995], as this represents the thermo-
dynamic driving force for the uptake of CO
2 from the
atmosphere. In the absence of major feedbacks, para-
doxically, the higher the future anthropogenic CO
2
concentration in the atmosphere, the higher the oce-
anic uptake will be.
Changes in ocean temperature, salinity, circulation,
and the ocean’s biological pump have, however, the
potential to substantially alter this uptake, both directly,
by impacting the uptake of anthropogenic CO
2, and
indirectly, by altering the air-sea balance of the natural
CO
2 cycle. Any climate change–induced alteration in
the future uptake of anthropogenic CO 2 by the ocean
will lead to feedbacks in the climate system, as the al-
tered atmospheric CO
2 concentration will either accel-
erate (positive feedback) or decelerate (negative feed-
back) the initial climate change.
It is instructive to ﬁrst discuss the impact of climate
change on the oceanic uptake of anthropogenic CO
2, and
only thereafter investigate the impact on the natural
carbon cycle. A summary of all feedbacks is given in table
10.2.4. For more detailed discussions, the reader is re-
ferred to Plattner et al. [2001] and Gruber et al. [2004].
Table 10.2.4
Summary of Marine Carbon Cycle Feedbacks
Process Sign Magnitude y
Uncertainty/
Understanding
Anthropogenic CO2 Uptake Feedbacks
Chemical feedback Positive H Low/high
Circulation feedback
(anthropogenic CO
2) Positive H Medium/medium
Natural Carbon Cycle Feedbacks
Temperature/salinity feedback Positive M Low/medium to high
Circulation feedback
(constant biota) Negative M-H Medium/medium
Ocean biota feedback
(circulation constant) Positive/negative M High/low
ySubjectively estimated (M: medium; H: high)
415
Carbon Cycle, CO 2, and Climate