In summary, it appears that the three relatively well
constrained processes, i.e., loss of carbon from the
terrestrial biosphere, increase in ocean salinity, and
ocean cooling, are unable to explain the 80 ppm draw-
down in atmospheric CO
2 that occurred during glacial
maxima. More speciﬁcally, if we take the 18 ppm in-
crease from terrestrial biosphere carbon release, the
18 ppm increase from salinity change, and the 30 ppm
decrease from cooling together, we arrive at a near-zero
change in atmospheric CO
2. Clearly other processes
must be at work.
Fundamental Mechanisms
Since changes in the solubility of CO
2 forced by chan-
ges in salinity and temperature can be ruled out as a
cause for the glacial drawdown of atmospheric CO
2, the
drawdown must be caused by processes that affect the
oceanic distribution of DIC and Alk. A useful frame-
work to start the discussion is equation (8.3.3), which
links changes in DIC and Alk to pCO
2 changes:
pCO2 /C25 K2
K0 /C1 K1
(2DIC /C0 Alk)2
Alk /C0 DIC (10:4:3)
This approximation shows that in order to decrease
surface ocean pCO
2 and hence atmospheric pCO2, the
processes must cause either a decrease of surface ocean
DIC, an increase in surface ocean Alk, or a combination
of these two effects.
Fundamentally, changes in any of the three carbon
pumps discussed in chapter 8, i.e., the soft-tissue pump,
carbonate pump, or gas exchange pump, can contribute
to the decrease in surface DIC. In thinking about the
action of these pumps, it is also important to recall that
the surface-to-deep gradient, DIC
s /C0 DICd, generated by
the biological pumps in a simpliﬁed one-dimensional
framework depends not only on the magnitude of the
downward transport of organic matter F
Corg and CaCO3,
FCaCO3 , but also on the magnitude of vertical transport
and mixing, n (see equation (1.2.3)), thus
DICs ¼ DICd /C0 FCorg þ FCaCO3
n (10:4:4)
Therefore, the surface ocean concentration, DICs, can
be reduced not only by an increase in the export of
carbon, but also by a reduction in vertical transport and
mixing, n. Undeniably, both cases need to be consid-
ered. A reduction in DIC
d, reﬂecting essentially a re-
duction in whole-ocean DIC, could also be invoked, but
we are unaware of a mechanism that could have caused
such a decrease. In fact, the whole-ocean DIC must
have been higher during the LGM than it is today,
because of the decrease in ocean volume, because of
the uptake of the carbon lost from the terrestrial bio-
sphere, and because of the additional uptake of CO
2
from the atmosphere required to lower atmospheric
CO
2.
Analogous to DIC, the surface ocean Alk concentra-
tion, Alks, is governed by the deep concentration, Alkd,
as well as the balance between the export of CaCO 3 and
organic carbon, and the resupply of Alk by mixing and
transport:
Alks ¼ Alkd /C0 2FCaCO3 /C0 rN:C FCorg
n (10:4:5)
where rN:C is the nitrogen-to-carbon ratio of the or-
ganic matter exported from the surface ocean. We can
therefore increase the surface concentration of Alk
by decreasing the strength of the carbonate pump, by
increasing the strength of the soft-tissue pump, or by
increasing the deep concentration Alk
d. The latter
change can be accomplished by dissolving CaCO 3 sedi-
ments, or increasing the Alk input into the ocean by
rivers.
We thus have to consider changes in ocean circula-
tion, in surface ocean production of organic matter and
CaCO
3 and their subsequent export and remineraliza-
tion, in river input, and in the interaction with the
CaCO
3 in the sediments, as possible candidate pro-
cesses driving the glacial-interglacial changes in atmo-
spheric CO
2. We also have to consider changes in air-
sea gas exchange, as changes in the kinetics of the ex-
change of CO
2 across the air-sea interface can lead to
changes in surface DIC as well (see discussion about
the gas exchange pump in chapter 8). Given these
myriad possible processes, our search for a cause of the
glacial CO
2 drawdown would be greatly aided if we had
some guidance as to which region and which processes
we need to focus on.
Southern Ocean Dominance
It was recognized early on that not all regions of the
world’s ocean exert an equal inﬂuence on atmospheric
CO
2. A series of seminal papers in the early 1980s
pointed out that the high-latitude oceans, despite
their limited area, dictate the atmospheric CO
2 content
to a large extent [ Knox and McElroy , 1984; Sarmiento
and Toggweiler , 1984; Siegenthaler and Wenk , 1984].
Since these independent studies were done at Harvard,
Princeton, and Bern (Switzerland) respectively, Broecker
and Peng [1998] coined the expression Harvardton-
Bears to refer to them as a group. This concept of high-
latitude dominance has been extremely inﬂuential in
shaping the discussion about the causes for the glacial-
interglacial changes in atmospheric CO
2.
The dominance of the high-latitude regions is a
consequence of the direct connection that exists be-
tween the high-latitude ocean and the deep ocean
through deep water formation and isopycnal ventila-
tion, pinning the chemistry of the high-latitude surface
ocean very close to that of the deep ocean. By contrast,
435
Carbon Cycle, CO
2, and Climate