the link between the cold and dense waters of the deep
ocean (cold water sphere) and the warm and light wa-
ters of the low latitudes (warm water sphere) is much
weaker, a direct consequence of ocean interior ﬂow
occuring along isopycnal surfaces. An additional reason
for the high-latitude dominance stems from the fact
that the transport of CO
2 via the atmosphere between
the low-latitude and high-latitude regions is sufﬁciently
rapid to bring the pCO
2 of the low-latitude surface
ocean close to that of the high latitudes. As a result, any
anomalous CO
2 created in the low latitudes will escape
into the atmosphere, and tend to be taken up by the
high-latitude oceans and ultimately buffered in the
deep ocean, leading to only a small net change in at-
mospheric pCO
2. In order to illustrate this constraint,
we use the three-box model introduced in chapter 1
(
ﬁgure 10.4.3) and perturb either the high latitudes or
low latitudes with a warming of 2 /C14 C. Figure 10.4.4
shows that in the new steady state, the 2 /C14 C warming in
the high latitudes causes an atmospheric CO2 change of
15 ppm, whereas the same warming in the low latitudes
causes an atmospheric CO
2 change that is 5 times
smaller, i.e., only 3 ppm. In the latter case, most of the
CO
2 that is expelled from the low latitudes is taken up
by the high latitudes and buffered by the deep ocean
reservoir. We term this the equilibration effect.
Equilibration of Low-Latitude Changes
What determines the magnitude of this low-latitude
equilibration effect, i.e., the substantial reduction in the
impact of low-latitude changes on atmospheric CO
2?I t
turns out that the degree of equilibration depends on
the relative magnitude of air-sea gas exchange versus
the magnitude of the exchange between the surface and
deep ocean. If air-sea gas exchange is efﬁcient in
equilibrating the atmosphere and surface ocean, at-
mospheric pCO
2 will be almost entirely determined by
the high latitudes and will not respond to low-latitude
changes. Conversely, if air-sea gas exchange is slow rel-
ative to the exchange between the cold and warm water
spheres, changes in low-latitude chemistry and tem-
perature can lead to substantial changes in atmospheric
CO
2.
Given the importance of this equilibration con-
straint, it behooves us to investigate it further. We re-
turn to the three-box model (ﬁgure 10.4.3), since it
captures the relevant processes, while being simple
enough to understand straightforwardly. The deﬁning
characteristics of this model are: (i) separation of ocean
surface into a low-latitude box and a high-latitude box,
(ii) a deep box, whose volume comprises nearly 97% of
the total volume of the ocean, rendering its chemistry
nearly invulnerable to internal redistributions of car-
bon, but not to external perturbations, such as associ-
ated with the dissolution of CaCO
3, (iii) an exchange
term, fhd that couples the high-latitude box very closely
to the deep ocean, and (iv) an overturning term, T,
which represents sinking in high latitudes and up-
welling in low latitudes. While various shortcomings of
this model have been noted, such as the fact that there
is in reality little upwelling of deep waters directly in
the warm low latitudes (see discussion in chapter 7 and
Toggweiler [1999]), this model is nevertheless very in-
structive. Temperatures of this model are set to 21.5
/C14 C
for the low-latitude box and 2 /C14 C for the high-latitude
box. By design, the deep box will have the same tem-
perature as the high-latitude box, i.e., 2
/C14 C.
We investigate the equilibration effect in this model
by initializing it with homogeneous DIC and Alk and
then determining how the carbon is redistributed
within the system depending on the relative rates of air-
sea exchange and ocean mixing (see ﬁgure 10.4.5). As
the equilibration effect is primarily determined by
physical processes, it is sufﬁcient to neglect biology and
consider only an abiotic ocean. Alkalinity is set to
2340 mmol kg
/C0 1 in all boxes and DIC is initialized to
2150 mmol kg/C0 1, yielding an initial pCO2 of 280 matm at
the surface of the high-latitude box and an initial pCO2
of 630 matm at the surface of the low-latitude box. The
model is then run forward in time until it reaches a
steady state.
We ﬁrst investigate a case where the transport of DIC
between the surface and deep ocean is far more rapid
than the transport of CO
2 from the warm surface res-
ervoir via the atmosphere to the cold surface reservoir
(ﬁgure 10.4.5c). This is accomplished by reducing the
gas exchange coefﬁcient to a very small number. No
equilibration will occur in this case, as the DIC con-
centration in the low-latitude surface box will remain
relatively close to the mean concentration of the deep
box. As some carbon will be lost to the atmosphere, the
T
T
fhd
T
Φ h
Φ l
DEEP
LOW-LATHIGH-LAT
ATMOSPHERE
Figure 10.4.3: Schematics of the high-latitude outcrop three-box
model [c.f. Sarmiento and Toggweiler , 1984; Knox and McElroy , 1984;
and Siegenthaler and Wenk , 1984] (cf. ﬁgure 1.2.5).
436
Chapter 10