around the thermohaline circuit, to 60 Sv for the high-
latitude-to-deep-ocean mixing term, and to 13 cm h
/C0 1 for
the piston velocity of CO2, atmosphericpCO2 stabilizes at
303 matm (ﬁgure 10.4.5a).
Broecker et al. [1999a] attempted to capture the degree
of this deep ocean equilibration effect of low-latitude
changes by the Harvardton-Bear Equilibration Index
(HBEI). They deﬁned this index in such a way that it
describes how close the realistic case is to the full
equilibration case weighted by the difference between
the two extreme cases of full and no equilibration:
HBEI ¼
pCOatm
2
jrealistic /C0 pCOatm
2
jfull equil
pCOatm
2
jno equil /C0 pCOatm
2
jfull equil
(10:4:6)
¼ 303 /C0 281
514 /C0 281 ¼ 0:09 (10:4:7)
The value of the HBEI can be interpreted as an ap-
proximate measure of how effective a given change in
the low latitudes is in changing atmospheric CO
2.A n
HBEI value of 1 means that no equilibration with the
deep ocean occurs and therefore atmospheric CO
2 will
respond proportionally to any change in low-latitude
pCO
2. A value of 0 means that full equilibration occurs,
i.e., changes in low-latitude pCO2 would have no impact
on atmospheric CO 2, since atmospheric CO 2 is con-
trolled by the high latitudes in connection with the
deep ocean reservoir. Note that the HBEI is only an
approximation of the degree of equilibration and
atmospheric effectiveness, as the exact values depends
on the magnitude of the perturbation because of the
associated changes in the buffer factor.
The low HBEI value of 0.09 found by this simple
three-box model implies that for a given change in low-
latitude pCO
2, only approximately 9% of this change
multiplied with the fractional area of the low latitudes,
i.e., 0.85 /C1 0.9 ¼ 0.08, would show up as a change in at-
mospheric CO
2. If this value of HBEI is correct, we can
immediately rule out any low-latitude–based hypothe-
sis. For example, the discussion about the exact mag-
nitude of low-latitude cooling would be largely irrele-
vant, since even a very large cooling of 6
/C14 C, leading to a
low-latitude pCO2 reduction of 70 matm, would cause
only a 6 matm reduction in atmospheric CO 2. However,
before we can have any conﬁdence in ruling out low-
latitude–based hypotheses, we need to ensure that this
extremely low sensitivity of low-latitude changes is real
and not just a peculiarity of this simple three-box
model.
Broecker et al . [1999a] computed the HBEI of a wide
spectrum of models, ranging from simple box models
to three-dimensional ocean biogeochemistry models
(
ﬁgure 10.4.6). They found that three-dimensional cou-
pled ocean circulation/biogeochemistry models show a
substantially larger inﬂuence of the low latitudes (HBEI
indices up to 0.4) than the box models. It is presently
not clear how large the HBEI of the real ocean is, but it
is instructive to consider which processes determine its
magnitude [see also Archer et al., 2000a; Ito and Follows,
2003; Follows et al., 2002]. Since the HBEI is a measure
of the degree of equilibration between CO
2 anomalies
in the low latitudes and the deep ocean via exchange
with the high latitudes, any process that affects this
equilibration changes the HBEI. Possible candidates
are variations in the rate of CO
2 exchange across the air-
sea interface, the magnitude and location of the mass
exchange between the warm and cold water spheres,
and the reservoir sizes of these two spheres.
For example, as pointed out by Toggweiler et al. [2003],
the exchange of CO
2 between the atmosphere and the
high-latitude surface ocean is kinetically unconstrained
in this three-box model, while this exchange experi-
ences strong kinetic limitation in three-dimensional
ocean models. This is primarily a result of the fact that
the high latitudes in the three-box model were assigned
a fractional area of 15%, while a census of the surface
area of the ocean that has surface densities equal to or
denser than the deep ocean in a typical three-dimen-
sional ocean model gives fractional areas of only a few
percent. Restricting the high-latitude area so that
the slowness of air-sea gas exchange becomes limiting
for the exchange between the atmosphere and high-
latitude box will work against equilibration, and there-
fore increase the HBEI. Figure 10.4.7b shows that if the
high-latitude surface area in the three-box model is set
to 3%, similar to what it is in three-dimensional ocean
circulation models, the HBEI index goes up to above
0.3. The effective surface area of the high latitudes can
also be decreased by increasing the fraction that is
covered by sea ice, leading to a similar increase in the
HBEI index (ﬁgure 10.4.7a).
The magnitude of the exchange between the warm
and cold water spheres and their relation to their res-
ervoir sizes represents a second set of factors control-
ling the HBEI. Any increase in the exchange between
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50atmospheric HBEI
3D GCM’sBOX MODELS2Box
3Box
Pandora
Cyclops
2D GCM
HAMOCC
POBM1
Figure 10.4.6: Comparison of estimates of HBEI from a range of
models. From Broecker et al. [1999a].
438
Chapter 10