Bear box models, as the warm-water sphere in the
real ocean includes much of the upper and mid-
thermocline, whereas the Harvardton-Bear box models
restrict it to a very thin surface layer. As a consequence,
the warm-water sphere has almost no capacity in the
Harvardton-Bear box models, while it may comprise
more than 20% of the total ocean volume in the real
ocean. Figure 10.4.7d shows that the HBEI increases as
the volume of the warm-water sphere increases. In fact,
expanding the volume of the low-latitude box and in-
creasing the exchange between the low-latitude and
deep boxes are structurally analogous, as both tend to
increase the effective carbon reservoir size associated
with the low-latitude surface, making equilibration with
the deep ocean more difﬁcult.
A last measure to consider is the magnitude of the
meridional overturning circulation, which is not cap-
tured in the Harvardton-Bear box models, but is in-
cluded in some of the four- to seven-box models (e.g.,
Toggweiler [1999] Lane et al. [2005]). For example, Lane et
al. [2005] pointed out recently that the inclusion of a
dynamic feedback of the changes in ocean temperature
and salinity on the meridional overturning circulation
during the last glacial led to a substantial increase in
the sensitivity of atmospheric CO
2 to changes in the
low latitudes. This suggests a note of caution when
interpreting HBEIs computed for current interglacial
conditions, as these values might be considerably dif-
ferent during glacial conditions.
In summary, it appears that the Harvardton-Bear box
models likely underestimate the HBEI, and therefore
underestimate the possible role of low-latitude changes.
However, given the fact that the reservoir associated
with the low latitudes is much smaller than the high-
latitude surface and deep ocean reservoir, the equili-
bration of a change in the low-latitude surface ocean
with the deep ocean is always going to be larger than
the equilibration of a change in the high-latitude sur-
face ocean with the low-latitude reservoir. Therefore,
the low latitudes are always going to be less effective in
changing atmospheric CO
2 than the high latitudes. In
addition, substantial leverage exists in the high lati-
tudes to change surface ocean pCO
2 there, making the
high latitudes the primary region of focus for explain-
ing the large atmospheric CO
2 changes associated with
G/IG transitions. We therefore focus our discussion on
this region next.
Closing the Southern Ocean Window
We have seen in chapter 8 that the Southern Ocean
represents an area of strong biologically driven out-
gassing of CO
2 (ﬁgure 8.5.1). This outgassing is pri-
marily a consequence of upwelling that brings waters
with high concentrations of respired DIC (DC
soft) to the
surface near the Southern Ocean Polar Front. Since bi-
ological productivity in this region is too slow to ﬁx all
this excess CO
2, a substantial fraction of it escapes to the
atmosphere. We also highlighted in chapter 8 that the
existence of residual nutrients at the surface is a good
indicator of this biologically induced CO
2 leak into the
atmosphere. In steady state, the CO 2 lost to the atmo-
sphere in the Southern Ocean is taken up elsewhere,
particularly in those regions where the residual nutri-
ents are taken up and used to fuel photosynthesis. The
strength of the Southern Ocean leak is directly con-
trolled by the balance between the upward supply of
DC
soft and the downward export of organic matter. A
reduction in the upward supply of DCsoft, while keeping
organic matter export the same, will reduce surface
ocean DIC, close the window, and pull down atmo-
spheric CO
2. Another option to close the window is to
strengthen export production, while keeping the upward
supply of DC
soft and nutrients the same. As the Southern
Ocean represents the main window of the surface ocean
to the deep ocean DIC reservoir, the closure of this
window has a large impact on atmospheric CO
2.
We investigate this Southern Ocean window and its
impact on atmospheric CO 2 with the same three-box
model that we used above for the discussion of the
HBEI. In this case, we have to consider biological pro-
duction and export, which we tie to phosphate. It is as-
sumed that all phosphate is consumed in the low-lati-
tude box, linking its biological export directly to the rate
of supply of phosphate. In contrast, only a fraction of
the phosphate is used in the high latitudes. This leaves
the biological production in the high latitudes a free
parameter and makes the high-latitude phosphate
concentration, [PO
4]h, a key diagnostic of the model.
The full set of equations and a solution method is given
by Toggweiler and Sarmiento [1985]. A steady-state so-
lution for the high-latitude ocean DIC, DIC
h, can be
obtained in a manner analogous to that we have used
for O
2 (see equation (1.2.11)):
DICh ¼ DICd /C0 rC:PO4 ([PO4]d /C0 [PO4]h) (10 :4:8)
The high-latitude PO 3/C0
4 concentration is controlled
by the balance between the rate of supply from the
deep ocean and the rate of biological removal by high-
latitude export of organic phosphorus, F
P
h
:
[PO4]h ¼ [PO4]d fhd /C0 FP
h
fhd þT (10:4:9)
where fhd is the high-latitude–deep ocean mixing term,
and T the overturning term (see also ﬁgure 10.4.3).
Inserting (10.4.9) into (10.4.8) gives:
DICh ¼ DICd /C0 rC:PO4
[PO4]d T þ FP
h
T þfhd
(10:4:10)
Thus any reduction in the mixing term, fhd, or increase
in biological export, FP
h
, or overturning circulation, T,
Chapter 10
440