occurs in regions of low SST and vice versa. Discuss the implications of this
ﬁnding for the response of the surface ocean pCO
2 to variations associated
with ENSO.
10.12 Discuss the impact of ENSO on the air-sea exchange of natural and an-
thropogenic CO2 in the tropical Paciﬁc.
10.13 Use the three-box model of the equatorial Paciﬁc (ﬁgure 10.3.7) for inves-
tigating the impact of ENSO on surface ocean properties and atmospheric
CO
2. (Note that this model is structurally very similar to the three-box model
of the global ocean, except that the overturning circulation is reversed.)
The area of the equatorial surface box is 22 /C2 10
12 m2 and that of the mid-
latitude box is 100 /C2 1012 m2. The depths are given in ﬁgure 10.3.7.
a. Write down the phosphate balance equations for the three boxes given
the assumption that biological uptake and export depend linearly on
the phosphate concentration, i.e., F ¼ l /C1 [PO
3/C0
4 ], and that all organic
phosphorus exported from the surface boxes remineralizes within the
thermocline box.
b. Plot the phosphate concentration in the equatorial and mid-latitude
box as a function of the upwelling mass ﬂux, F
u. Set the exchange ﬂux
FMT to 25 Sv. Assume a mean phosphate concentration of
1 mmol m/C0 3. Assume for l a value of 1/30 day /C0 1.
c. Discuss the expected biologically induced air-sea exchange ﬂuxes,
considering what you learned in chapter 8 about the relationship be-
tween residual nutrients and this biologically induced ﬂux. Assume a
mean DIC concentration of 2100 mmol m
/C0 3 and a constant carbon-to-
phosphorus stoichiometry, rC:PO4 of 117:1.
d. Add DIC and Alk to the model, but do not yet consider air-sea exchange.
Compute the DIC concentration, and the pCO2 in the two surface
boxes. Assume a constant Alk of 2320 mmol kg/C0 1 and use the lookup
table for problem 8.14 in chapter 8. The temperature of the equatorial
upwelling box is 22
/C14 C and that of the mid-latitude box is 26 /C14 C.
e. Compute the exchange ﬂux of CO 2 between the two surface boxes and
the atmosphere for a ﬁxed atmospheric CO 2 of 360 matm. Assume
that this exchange is a small fraction of the total carbon balance,
permitting you to neglect it in the computation of the surfaceDIC. Use
the global mean gas exchange coefﬁcient for CO
2 given in chapter 3.
f. Investigate how the air-sea gas exchange varies as you change the
upwelling ﬂux from the thermocline, Fu, from 55 Sv (for La Nin˜a
condition) to 5 Sv (for El Nin˜o condition). (To keep the problem
manageable, keep atmospheric CO 2 constant as before.) If you keep
the anomalous air-sea ﬂux constant for a year, how much would you
change atmospheric CO
2, actually?
g. Finally, consider the fully coupled system, i.e., make the carbon in the
atmosphere an integral part of the carbon balance in the system. This
problem requires a numerical solution.
10.14 List and discuss the various lines of evidence which suggest that the amount
of carbon stored in the terrestrial biosphere was much lower during the last
glacial maximum than it is today.
10.15 Why can we assume that only a small fraction of the carbon lost from
the terrestrial biosphere during glacial times remained in the atmosphere?
Chapter 10
456